CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
Benjamin Raymond Lowe
Crown Castle Inc. - Senior VP of Corporate Finance & Treasurer
 
Daniel K. Schlanger
Crown Castle Inc. - Executive VP & CFO
 
Jay A. Brown
Crown Castle Inc. - President, CEO & Director
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
Brandon Lee Nispel
KeyBanc Capital Markets Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
 
Brett Joseph Feldman
Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., Research Division - Equity Analyst
 
David William Barden
BofA Securities, Research Division - MD
 
Gregory Bradford Williams
Cowen and Company, LLC, Research Division - Director
 
Jonathan Atkin
RBC Capital Markets, Research Division - MD & Senior Analyst
 
Matthew Niknam
Deutsche Bank AG, Research Division - Director
 
Michael Ian Rollins
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - MD & U.S. Telecoms Analyst
 
Nicholas Ralph Del Deo
MoffettNathanson LLC - Senior Analyst
 
Philip A. Cusick
JPMorgan Chase & Co, Research Division - MD and Senior Analyst
 
Richard Hamilton Prentiss
Raymond James & Associates, Inc., Research Division - Head of Telecommunication Services Equity
Research & Research Analyst
 
Simon William Flannery
Morgan Stanley, Research Division - MD
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Good day, everyone, and welcome to Crown Castle's Q3 2022 Earnings Call. As a reminder, today's call is being recorded. At this time, I
would like to turn the conference over to Ben Lowe, Senior VP of Corporate Finance. Please go ahead, sir.
 
Benjamin Raymond Lowe
Crown Castle Inc. - Senior VP of Corporate Finance & Treasurer
Great. Thank you, Melinda, and good morning, everyone. Thank you for joining us today as we discuss our third quarter 2022 results.
With me on the call this morning are Jay Brown, Crown Castle's Chief Executive Officer; and Dan Schlanger, Crown Castle's Chief
Financial Officer. To aid the discussion, we have posted supplemental materials in the Investors section of our website at
crowncastle.com that will be referenced throughout the call this morning. This conference call will contain forward-looking statements,
which are subject to certain risks, uncertainties and assumptions, and the actual results may vary materially from those expected.
Information about potential factors which could affect our results is available in the press release and the Risk Factors section of the
company's SEC filings. Our statements are made as of today, October 20, 2022, and we assume no obligation to update any
forward-looking statements.
In addition, today's call includes discussions of certain non-GAAP financial measures. Tables reconciling these non-GAAP financial
measures are available in the supplemental information package in the Investors section of the company's website at crowncastle.com.
So with that, let me turn the call over to Jay.
 
Jay A. Brown
Crown Castle Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Thanks, Ben, and thank you, everyone, for joining us on the call this morning. As you saw from our third quarter results and the 6.5%
increase to our dividend, we are seeing the benefits of a strong leasing environment as we support our customers' growth initiatives with
their deployment of 5G. With this increase, we have grown dividends per share at a compound annual growth rate of 9% since we
established our long-term growth target of 7% to 8% per year in 2017, returning over $10 billion or 20% of our current market
capitalization to shareholders over that period of time.
Our customers have focused on utilizing towers during their initial deployment of 5G, resulting in the second consecutive year of 6%
organic revenue growth in our tower business as we continue to outpace the industry. We expect this momentum to carry into 2023 with
another year of solid organic growth of at least 5% for our tower business.
In addition, we expect to double the rate of small cell deployments next year compared to the 5,000 nodes we expect to install this year
to meet the growing demand for our customers as 5G networks will require small cells at scale.
For fiber solutions, we expect revenue to be flat in 2023 compared to 2022 as a result of several discrete items that Dan will discuss later.
We expect revenue growth to return to approximately 3% by the end of the year. Consistent with what we have previously disclosed, we
also expect the rationalization of a portion of Sprint's legacy network by T-Mobile to have some near-term impacts on our financial
results without altering our long-term growth potential of our strategy.
We continue to believe the total impact of the Sprint network rationalization will be approximately $275 million of annualized churn
concluding in 2025. As I'll speak to in just a moment, I see tremendous opportunities ahead of us, giving us confidence in our ability to
deliver on our long-term target of growing dividends 7% to 8% per year. However, with $225 million of remaining Sprint churn and $140
million of additional run rate interest expense, we expect dividend per share growth in 2024 and 2025 to be below our long-term target.
Looking back over the last several decades in the wireless industry, we have experienced periods of network rationalization by our
customers following consolidation events. In each of those instances, we saw increased demand for our assets over time as our
customers reinvested the synergies gained from those combinations back into their networks to further improve their competitive
positions and keep pace with wireless data growth.
I expect we'll see a similar dynamic play out this time around. As such, over the long term, I believe our strategy and unmatched portfolio
of 40,000 towers, 115,000 small cells on air under contract, and 85,000 route miles of fiber concentrated in top U.S. markets have
positioned Crown Castle to deliver significant value to shareholders for many years to come.
We are focused on the U.S. because we believe it represents the best market in the world for wireless infrastructure ownership when
considering both growth and risk. The relative strength of the U.S. market has been clear to us during times of global economic
prosperity, and I believe that gap in performance is widening further in current challenging macroeconomic environment.
The operating conditions underlying in our shared infrastructure model have been better in the U.S. than any other market in the world.
We have benefited over time from persistent growth in mobile data that has required hundreds of billions of dollars of network
investment by our customers.
As a result of the quality of the networks and the user experience enabled by this level of investment, U.S. consumers have used their
wireless devices more and more, and have been willing and able to pay for that improving mobile experience. In turn, the wireless
carriers have taken the higher cash flows generated from their customers and invested even more in the networks and the cycle
continues.
When we assess the global landscape for wireless infrastructure ownership, we do not see evidence of that same virtuous cycle in any
other market. The combination of persistent growth in mobile data and the value we deliver to our customers by providing a low-cost
shared infrastructure solution has enabled us to consistently generate growth through various macroeconomic cycles.
Further, I believe our core value proposition of reducing the overall cost of deploying and operating communications networks is even
more compelling for our customers in times of increasing capital costs.
Adding to our positive view of the opportunity we have in the U.S., I believe we are still in the early stages of 5G development, providing a
long runway of growth and the demand for our comprehensive communications infrastructure offering across towers, small cells and
fiber.
Similar to other generational network upgrades, we expect 5G to drive sustained growth in our tower business as our customers add
equipment to our 40,000 towers. We also believe 5G will be different as it will require the deployment of small cells at scale to increase
the capacity and density of wireless networks as more spectrum deployed across macro towers will not be sufficient to keep up with the
growth in mobile data demand.
As a result of the requirement to build out this denser network, we believe the duration and magnitude of 5G investment will likely
exceed prior network investment cycles, further extending our long-term growth opportunity.
With this view in mind, we have invested $6 billion of capital in high-capacity fiber and small cells that are concentrated in top U.S.
markets. That capital has a weighted average life of approximately 5 years and is yielding more than 7% today with more than 60,000
contracted small cell nodes in our backlog, including a record number of colocation nodes. We expect the yield to increase over time as
we put those small cells on air.
In 2023, we expect to double our small cell deployments with over half of the nodes co-located on existing fiber. With the increased mix
in colocation, we expect our net CapEx to increase by only 10% over 2022 levels, reflecting attractive incremental lease-up returns. The
resulting incremental returns are consistent with our expectations for small cell colocations to drive 2-tenant system returns to low
double-digit yields on invested capital, just like we have achieved in towers.
As we've proven, announced the value proposition for our tower assets over time, those assets now generate a yield on invested capital of
approximately 12%, with meaningful capacity to support additional growth.
Looking at how well our overall strategy is performing. Since 2017, we have increased our consolidated return on invested capital by 160
basis points to 9.5% and returned over $10 billion to shareholders through our dividend that has increased at a compound annual growth
rate of 9%. While also investing $7 billion of capital into attractive assets we believe will generate returns well in excess of our cost of
capital and contribute to dividend growth in the future.
I believe that the combination highlights how compelling and differentiated our strategy is. We provide investors with the most exposure
to the development of next-generation networks with our comprehensive offering of towers, small cells and fiber, a pure-play U.S.
wireless infrastructure provider with exposure to the best growth and the lowest risk market.
A compelling total return profile with a current yield of nearly 5% and a long-term annual dividend growth target of 7% to 8%, and the
development of an attractive -- of attractive new assets that we believe will extend our runway of growth and shareholder value creation.
In the context of our 6.5% dividend per share growth this year, it is remarkable to consider the underlying strength of our business can
absorb the significant headwinds of interest expense increases and Sprint cancellations in the near term without disrupting the
long-term growth of the business.
I believe this durability of the underlying demand trends we see in the U.S. that provides significant visibility into the anticipated future
growth of our business, the deliberate decisions we have made to reduce the risks associated with our strategy, and our history of steady
execution makes Crown Castle an excellent investment that will generate compelling returns over time.
And with that, I'll turn the call over to Dan.
 
Daniel K. Schlanger
Crown Castle Inc. - Executive VP & CFO
Thanks, Jay, and good morning, everyone. We delivered another solid quarter of results in the third quarter as our customers are actively
deploying 5G at scale. Our strong operating results this year are helping absorb the impact from higher interest rates, leaving our 2022
AFFO growth expectations unchanged.
Looking ahead to 2023, we expect overall leasing activity to remain healthy, resulting in growth in cash flows that supports the 6.5%
dividend increase we announced yesterday. Before I walk through some of the moving pieces within the 2023 outlook, I want to briefly
discuss the third quarter results.
Turning to Page 4. Core organic growth of more than 5% benefited from a robust tower growth of 7%, and included 4% small cell
growth, and 1% growth in Fiber Solutions. The strong top line growth contributed to 10% growth in adjusted EBITDA and 5% growth in
AFFO as our operating results were partially offset by higher interest expense.
Turning to our outlook on Page 5. Our expectations for 2022 remain unchanged. And for 2023, we expect 4% site rental revenue growth,
3% adjusted EBITDA growth, and 4% AFFO growth. As you saw in the earnings release, there are a few moving pieces within the 2023
outlook that are not typical.
So let me spend a minute walking through those components. Consistent with what we previously disclosed, we expect T-Mobile to
cancel a portion of their tower, small cell and fiber leases over the next few years related to the consolidation of the legacy Sprint
network. We expect to see an impact of this network rationalization in our financial results in 2023.
As Jay mentioned, we continue to expect total churn from the T-Mobile Sprint network consolidation to be approximately $275 million,
consisting of tower churn of approximately $200 million occurring in 2025 as well as approximately $45 million of small cell churn and
$30 million in fiber solutions over the next 3 years.
As you saw in the press release, we expect a reduction of $30 million in small cell and fiber solutions run rate revenue in 2023 from the
Sprint cancellations. Based on our customer agreements, T-Mobile is obligated to pay the remaining contracted revenue on those sites at
the time of cancellation, resulting in expected cash payments of $165 million into 2023.
Given the nature of the churn and the associated payment of accelerated future contracted revenue and to make the comparisons more
helpful, we've excluded the $135 million net benefit in 2023 from the organic growth comparisons in the remainder of this discussion.
Turning our focus to the fundamental trends we expect in 2023 on Page 6. We anticipate another year of solid tower growth,
complemented by a doubling of our small cell activity as we expect to install 10,000 nodes in 2023, up from 5,000 this year. With
respect to fiber solutions, we expect underlying activity growth to be offset by items that contributed to 2022 revenue that are not
forecast to recur in 2023 as well as the rollover impact from approximately $10 million of Sprint churn that occurred in 2022.
As a result of these discrete items, we expect fiber solutions revenue to be consistent with 2022 levels but believe the business will return
to our previously discussed 3% per revenue growth going forward.
Putting those components together, we expect 2023 organic contribution to site rental billings of approximately $360 million or $225
million, excluding the $135 million net benefit from the Sprint cancellation. The $225 million of organic growth consists of 5% growth in
towers, 8% growth in small cells, and flat revenue in fiber solutions.
Turning to Page 7. 2023 AFFO growth is expected to be $100 million to $145 million, which includes the $135 million net benefit of the
Sprint cancellation, a $140 million increase in interest expense, and $20 million of cost increases above typical levels due to labor and
other inflationary-related expenses.
The rapid rise in interest rates has accelerated to increase in interest expense we included in our long-term planning, causing some
near-term headwinds, but not impacting our capital allocation decisions.
We believe our investment-grade balance sheet is well positioned with 85% fixed rate debt, a weighted average maturity of
approximately 9 years, limited debt maturities through 2024 and more than $4.5 billion in available liquidity under our revolving credit
facility.
We ended the third quarter with 4.9x debt to adjusted EBITDA and expect to remain around 5x through 2023 as we plan to fund our
discretionary CapEx with incremental debt capacity generated by growth in cash flows for full year 2023. To that point, we expect our
discretionary CapEx to increase in 2023 to approximately $1.4 billion to $1.5 billion from approximately $1.2 billion this year. Out of our
total capital expenditures next year, approximately $300 million is expected to be spent in towers and $1.1 billion to $1.2 billion in our
fiber segment. Consolidated capital expenditures net of prepaid rent contributions are expected to be approximately $1 billion in 2023
compared to $900 million this year.
As Jay mentioned, the relatively small increase in net capital expenditures in 2023 demonstrates the benefits of our co-location model,
even while we continue to invest in new assets that we believe will contribute to long-term growth.
Wrapping up, we are excited about the opportunity we see as our customers continue to deploy 5G in the U.S. We believe focusing on the
U.S. provides the highest risk-adjusted return for our shareholders as our portfolio of towers, small cells and fiber provides unmatched
exposure to the best market in the world for communications infrastructure ownership.
Since we made significant investments in the small cell and fiber portion of our business in 2017, we have delivered 9% dividend per
share growth while continuing to invest organically in new assets to take advantage of the opportunity ahead of us.
The ongoing 5G investment cycle and the persistent growth in mobile data demand, combined with the inherent durability of our
business model and our low-risk balance sheet, provide us confidence in our ability to deliver on our long-term 7% to 8% dividend per
share growth target and create a compelling total return opportunity consisting of current yield and future growth.
And with that, Melinda, I'd like to open the call to questions.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) And we'll take our first question from Simon Flannery of Morgan Stanley.
 
Simon William Flannery
Morgan Stanley, Research Division - MD
Great. Thanks for all that color. On the small cell business, you've got a large backlog here. Could you give us a little bit more color about
pacing of the build? And to what extent there are supply chain issues that you need to take into account? And is it possible that you can
take this rate above 10,000. I think in years past, there was a hope that it could continue to accelerate from these levels?
And any updated thoughts on the demand side, given the rise of fixed wireless. Is there more interest in densification even than 6 or 12
months ago?
 
Jay A. Brown
Crown Castle Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Thanks for asking the questions. As we mentioned, Dan and I think both mentioned in our comments, we would expect in 2023, we're
going to double the number of nodes that we put on air compared to 2022. So seeing an acceleration from that. And then given the
number of nodes that we have in the backlog and the significant somewhat recent commitments that we received from Verizon and
T-Mobile of 50,000 nodes to be put on air, it certainly portends a continued acceleration as we go into 2024 and beyond.
So that's what we currently have in the backlog. I think I would draw out from that a little bit. And based on what we're seeing for the
deployment of 5G and the densification that's required in the networks, we think there's going to be a lot of demand for small cells well
beyond just what's currently in the backlog.
Some of that is probably drawn from our experience as nodes are going on air and meeting the need in the network, solving some of the
gaps and covering some of the increase in data traffic that we're seeing at discrete locations in the network where small cells have been
placed and how well that works as a network strategy to reuse the spectrum on both macro sites and small cells.
And then also our view of where data traffic is going to grow, too. The combination of those 2 things, both our actual experience and then
where we think traffic is going pretends a continued increase in the overall number of nodes that are going to need to be built inside of
these networks.
Supply chain challenges have certainly occurred. I think our team has done a really good job working closely with the carriers to navigate
through those supply chain challenges. I don't want to sound like there are no challenges to that because there have been numerous
challenges, but our team has been able to navigate those without impacting our expectation of node builds.
And as we sit here today, I don't think that will impact our ability to get to 10,000 or more nodes in 2023 as we put into our guidance. So I
think that's what I would point to and answer to your question.
 
Operator
And next, we'll hear from Jon Atkin of RBC.
 
Jonathan Atkin
RBC Capital Markets, Research Division - MD & Senior Analyst
I was interested in -- if you can comment on your ability to adjust for higher CPI, either in your new contracts, new colocations or your
amendments or even any provisions under your existing MLAs?
 
Jay A. Brown
Crown Castle Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Yes, Jon, typically, in our revenues that are on the books currently, most -- the vast majority of those revenues are fixed escalator and not
CPI based. I would note the same thing is true on the cost side of the equation. Our largest cost being our ground leases, which also have
a similar characteristic of a high percentage of those being fixed escalators.
So for the majority of the current run rate cash flows were fixed at both the revenue line and then down at the largest item that affects
direct margins. Then on the balance sheet side, we obviously have more than 80% of the debt that's fixed currently. So the current cash
flow stream is largely fixed with regards to CPI and implications from inflationary pressure.
As you think about the go forward, when we contract with customers, we're typically doing some level of 3 to 5 years of a framework
under which they'll sign new leases. So we're in the middle of that at any given point. And when we reach the natural end of those
contracted periods of time with a customer that relates to new sites that they will go on, then we have the opportunity to think about,
okay, what will the appropriate escalation provisions be in that next set of contracts. And we -- as we have in the past, we balance out the
benefits of doing floating rate versus doing a fixed rate on those contracts.
 
Jonathan Atkin
RBC Capital Markets, Research Division - MD & Senior Analyst
And then just on small cells, given what you talked a little bit about the backlog, which the conversion of that backlog seems to be kind
of accelerating. Are we to assume that it will be more of a back-end weighted contribution to the top line for 2020 -- during 2023 for
small cells?
 
Jay A. Brown
Crown Castle Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Yes, it will be back-end loaded during calendar year 2023, we'll get the benefit of getting those nodes on air into the run rate as we go
into 2024, but the actual work and the completion of those nodes coming on air and then turning into cash paying nodes that will be
back-end loaded in the calendar year.
 
Jonathan Atkin
RBC Capital Markets, Research Division - MD & Senior Analyst
And then given -- finally, just given the higher discretionary CapEx that you're projecting for 2023. Any -- if you maybe just review a little
bit, I know Dan mentioned this at the end, but kind of how you fund the dividend, if it's going to stay at a similar level next year, it sounds
like you will need to kind of lever up using the revolver? Or how do we think about the sources of funding to similarly sized dividend for
next year, if that's what the Board decides.
 
Jay A. Brown
Crown Castle Inc. - President, CEO & Director
I just want to make sure I answer the question you're asking. Are you referring to the dividend in 2024 or the dividend in 2023?
 
Jonathan Atkin
RBC Capital Markets, Research Division - MD & Senior Analyst
'23?
 
Jay A. Brown
Crown Castle Inc. - President, CEO & Director
So when we thought about sizing the dividend, we did the same process that we do, have done historically, and I'll go back to kind of
2017, at the end of '17 when we increased our target to 7% to 8%. We look at the -- the upcoming -- when we get to this time of the year
in the October time frame, we look at the upcoming year, and we look at what will the cash flow generation of the business be and then
what do we expect the run rate of cash flows to be by the time we exit the year.
So the dividend that we sized the increase of 6.5% considers where do we think we're going to exit, exit the next 12-month period of time
as we roll around to October of next year, and we look at the uplift that will occur in that run rate and the dividend that we gave the 6.5%
increase is size so that when we roll around to October, that's basically the run rate of the business.
The other benefit that we got, the other thing that we're considering is what is the cash flow characteristics during that 12-month period
of time. And in the case of the next 12 months, we're obviously benefiting from the payment of T-Mobile of the early cancellation fees that
Dan referenced in his comments, which increased the cash flow during this calendar year. So those are the 2 considerations that we
make when we're setting our dividend policy for the upcoming year.
 
Daniel K. Schlanger
Crown Castle Inc. - Executive VP & CFO
So Jon, just to put a point on that, we don't anticipate that we would fund any of that dividend with debt borrowings. That's from the
operating cash flow of the business, as Jay mentioned, and that's how we size the dividend. That's how we think about sizing dividend in
any period.
 
Operator
And moving on to Ric Prentiss of Raymond James.
 
Richard Hamilton Prentiss
Raymond James & Associates, Inc., Research Division - Head of Telecommunication Services Equity
Research & Research Analyst
A couple of questions. First, on the churn front. It looks like based on '22 guidance, churn is going to step up sequentially from third
quarter, fourth quarter. Anything special to call out there as far as what's driving that increase in churn? Is that part of that fiber Sprint
T-Mobile time?
 
Daniel K. Schlanger
Crown Castle Inc. - Executive VP & CFO
I don't think there is really a step up going in from the third quarter to fourth quarter, and there's nothing going on that would increase
the churn that we see in the business at all that will likely be on the low end of our churn for 2022 as we end the year.
So like I said, there's nothing going on in the business that we see is increasing our churn at all. It's pretty flat here quarter-over-quarter.
 
Richard Hamilton Prentiss
Raymond James & Associates, Inc., Research Division - Head of Telecommunication Services Equity
Research & Research Analyst
Okay. And then on the Sprint cancellation churn $275 million expected to be total. Did I hear Jay say something about there's $225
million left in that? I'm just trying to (inaudible).
 
Daniel K. Schlanger
Crown Castle Inc. - Executive VP & CFO
Yes, that's left going into 2024 and beyond. So we're going to realize some of that in 2023. So as we look into 2024, and I think what Jay
was mentioning, was thinking about the 2024 and 2025 dividend. So we're just sizing the amount that would be remaining at that point.
 
Richard Hamilton Prentiss
Raymond James & Associates, Inc., Research Division - Head of Telecommunication Services Equity
Research & Research Analyst
Okay. Second question is kind of around rates. What are you assuming for interest rates when you updated the guidance where you didn't
have to change '22. But when you look at '23, what kind of rates are you assuming in there just we can kind of keep track of what the Fed
actually does and where rates head?
 
Daniel K. Schlanger
Crown Castle Inc. - Executive VP & CFO
We have assumed at this point the forward curve for rates as of right now, which does move around a bit. But if you just look at the
forward curve, that's what we have in our assumptions.
 
Richard Hamilton Prentiss
Raymond James & Associates, Inc., Research Division - Head of Telecommunication Services Equity
Research & Research Analyst
So something in the low 4% range kind of.
 
Daniel K. Schlanger
Crown Castle Inc. - Executive VP & CFO
Yes. Yes, ultimately. And like I said, it moves around a little bit. So low to mid-4s.
 
Richard Hamilton Prentiss
Raymond James & Associates, Inc., Research Division - Head of Telecommunication Services Equity
Research & Research Analyst
Okay. Last one, similar on the rate question. What are you hearing, if anything, from the carrier customers as far as -- is the debt market
and interest rates doing anything to their capital spending or activity with you? Any worry about -- we get the questions from investors
about what happens if there's a recession. What are you hearing from the carrier customers as far as concerned about recession pressure
or concerning on interest rates as far as their ability and desire to spend with you in the short term?
 
Jay A. Brown
Crown Castle Inc. - President, CEO & Director
We have seen the carriers be remarkably consistent in their activity and focused on 5G deployment. And that has been our experience,
frankly, through past economic cycles as well. The carriers, obviously, are well funded. They have the cash flow capabilities to continue to
invest in 5G. And we haven't seen any change in the consumer behavior either.
So I think the place to watch for that is really is the consumer behavior changing. It's not. In fact, the consumer demand continues to
grow. And as we -- as I mentioned in my comments, consumer has been willing to pay for that improved and increased service. And so
we've seen the carrier investment cycle continue.
And at this point, I don't have any concern that we're going to see a pullback from that front on the carrier side. They all have multiyear
plans that they've shared with us, and they've obviously made sizable commitments to us around that -- around those deployment
cycles. So our teams are busy working with them closely on multiyear deployment. So don't expect to see a change in that demand
profile.
 
Operator
And next, we'll hear from Michael Rollins of Citi.
 
Michael Ian Rollins
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - MD & U.S. Telecoms Analyst
First, I'm curious if you can unpack the change from the tower leasing organic growth in '22 of about 6% to about 5% in '23 and step out
in activity dollars. And within that context, if you can give us an update on the visibility that you have going forward in terms of what the
shape of tower leasing -- organic power leasing without the T-Mobile churn should look like? And I'll save one for the end to follow up.
 
Jay A. Brown
Crown Castle Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Let me just talk about -- a little bit about the environment, and then Dan can kind of walk through the numbers on the organic
calculations. We're in the cycle, as I've made some comments around early in the cycle around 5G. And at the beginning part of every one
of the technology upgrades that we've seen in the business over the years as the carriers have gone from 2G to 3G, 3G to 4G, and now the
same, we're seeing the same thing as the carriers go from 4 to 5G, they focused the early day investment on macro sites, the towers that
they're already on in the places where they go through and they upgrade their network, add additional equipment to those sites that
they're already on in order to accommodate the new technologies.
Once they do that overlay, then they go back and they start to focus on increasing the density of their network. And they've done that
historically just by going on towers that they were not on previously. What's unique about the 5G cycle relative to prior cycles is that a
part of that network planning is not only going on macro sites, but also utilizing small cells to increase the density of the network.
So we're working with the carriers both on the tower side, the macro site side as well as the small cell side to cover the increase in traffic
that they're seeing as well as the technology upgrades that we're seeing. And we think there's a really long runway of growth on the
tower side.
Our view is that we're going to be multiyear north of or about 5% growth on the tower side, and we'll continue to be really good and
healthy demand for towers for an extended period of time, and we'll see that coupled with investment by the carriers on the small cells in
order to increase the density.
 
Daniel K. Schlanger
Crown Castle Inc. - Executive VP & CFO
And Mike, just we are moving from about 6% growth in 2022 to 5% growth in 2023. But as Jay said, we're excited about that because
we've been at about 6% for a couple of years now. And continuing on at 5% is a really good continuation of a long trend of growth.
And what we look for is to try to stack really good years of growth year-over-year-over-year as opposed to have outsized growth in the 1
year and then undersize than another. And this is just that type of trend playing out. And it puts us what we think is, like we've talked
about in the last couple of years, leading the industry in the last couple of years and staying within what is a relatively robust level of
tower leasing growth of 5% to 6%.
And as Jay said, we have a lot of visibility of that growth going forward. So you add all that together, and we're just -- we're excited
about. I think it's a great place to be.
 
Michael Ian Rollins
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - MD & U.S. Telecoms Analyst
And just a follow-up. So -- and I apologize, it's a little bit more of a complicated setup, but I was looking at 2 different numbers in your
supplemental. So I was looking at the midpoint of the revenue guidance. And I was looking at what you disclosed on the projected site
rental billings from tenant contracts that you gave over a multiyear period of time.
And if I compare like for '23, I adjust it to make it apples-to-apples, take out straight line, take out prepaid, take up the onetime benefit. If
I look at the '23, what's implied in the guidance, it's about -- at the midpoint, it's about 90 basis points higher than what that contracted
tenant revenue number is later in the supplemental.
So if I do the same thing historically, like last year, it was 200 basis points. And for the couple of years before that, it was an average of
almost 300 basis points.
So I apologize for that complicated set up. But the question is there something different about 2023 where you're expecting less
incremental activity above the commitments that you have from customers? Or did you approach maybe guidance in a different way than
you've done historically?
 
Jay A. Brown
Crown Castle Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Yes, Mike, thanks for the question. I think we can probably walk -- we could try to reconcile the numbers that you're talking about. But I
think the big picture answer to your question is the way that we've contracted with customers than what's occurred over the last several
years. We have a much higher percentage of our growth that has been contracted with customers as a result of the holistic agreements
that we've signed with them.
So there's not a change in the way that we're thinking about doing the guidance or the aggressiveness or conservatism that then our
forecast for the year, but rather you're seeing the benefit of the significant amount of contracted revenue that we have, and Dan
mentioned this a couple of times in his prepared remarks, but we're north of $40 billion of contracted customer commitments. So over a
multiyear period of time, we've contracted that growth.
So going back to the comments that I made in answer to your first question, we have a lot of visibility around that 5% plus growth
because it's -- so much of it is contracted. We still have the benefit of -- the upside is uncapped, but we have a really solid view of where
growth is.
So I think what you're seeing when you go back and look at the billings and you compare the historical in each of the years that you laid
out, when you look at the forecasted revenue compared to the amount that was in the billing, those are going through past periods
where we were adding some of these holistic agreements. So at each of those points, we may have had kind of no holistic agreements all
the way up to holistic agreements with several of our customers as we sit here today.
 
Operator
David Barden with Bank of America has our next question.
 
David William Barden
BofA Securities, Research Division - MD
A couple if I could. I guess the first one was -- I guess I want to ask this question in the context of normalizing 2023 rather than maybe
2024. But Dan, I think during your comments, you mentioned that net of churn, the fiber solutions business is not going to grow or at
least not expected to grow in '23. But you may be comment that were it not for some of the macro headwinds you would expect to grow
at a more normal long-term target of 3%.
I was wondering if you could kind of maybe give us some color as we kind of look at the other segments, small cells presumably losing
the Sprint churn will help it on a normalized basis. And then in macro, obviously, a little bit down from the 2021 level -- sorry, 2022 levels
of growth guided in 2023, if there is kind of wiggle room in "more normal circumstances for that to maybe be better"?
And I guess the second question is you're guiding to roughly flat prepaid rent amortization in '23, but that obviously is benefiting from a
$50 million one timer. And then at least on the forward-looking prepaid rent amortization schedule that you put on site in #18 in the
supplement, it looks like it's going to drop down pretty substantially from there again in 2024.
So looking at those offsets, potential normalized performance in the core business offset by declining prepaid rent amortization,
recognizing it's not cash, but how should we think about what the revenue and EBITDA trajectory might look like on a normalized basis
with those 2 forces opposing each other.
 
Jay A. Brown
Crown Castle Inc. - President, CEO & Director
I'll take the normalized revenue growth question, and Dan can speak to kind of some of your questions around prepaid. And I'll just tick
through each of the business lines. And if I missed something that you're trying to reconcile, feel free to ask again, Dave.
But on the tower side, if you exclude the Sprint cancellations, the bulk of which we talked about, it's going to occur in 2025. If you ignore
that and just look at normalized activity, we think that normalized activity in the business is going to see churn is somewhere in the
neighborhood of about 1% to 2%, just like our historical average has been.
So there's nothing else occurring on the tower side that I would point to as the need to normalize other than removing the Sprint
cancellations in a couple of years. And my comments before around the growth that we're seeing, both the contracted growth and the
opportunity for upside gives us confidence that we think we'll be able to see organic growth in and above that kind of 5% organic growth
levels. I don't think there's anything else in those numbers you really need to normalize in order to get the right run rate.
On the small cell side, we obviously talked about the churn and where that churn is going to hit. If you ignore the churn and get down to
the normalized level, the one thing you have to adjust for is the significant rate of growth and the timing of that growth.
So the number of nodes that we're going to turn on air next year doubling, obviously increases the activity and the fact that the activity
itself and when those nodes turn cash paying being back-end loaded when you look at our contribution to the financial results, whether
it's organic growth in terms of number of dollars or you look at it on the face of the financial statements, you don't see the full effect of
those 10,000 nodes until -- as we roll into 2024, and we get to the full run rate of those nodes getting turned on air by the end of 2023.
So you have to normalize for the activity and the doubling of the activity as well as the back-end loading in order to get to a more
normalized run rate of growth.
On fiber solutions, as I mentioned in my comments, we think the revenue growth is going to be flat. That's a function of, in part, the churn
activity that we saw this year, partly due to the Sprint cancellations that we'll see hopping over into 2023. But by the time we get to the
end of the year, when we get to kind of fourth quarter results and look backwards over a quarter-over-quarter, meaning quarter 2023
compared to quarter 4 of 2022, we think we'll be back at that 3% growth that we've expected in the business.
Normalizing for all of the churn and the other items, we're seeing that level of activity currently in the business. So we're not forecasting
growth in activity as we get towards the back of the year. We're just looking at normal activity and removing all of the onetime items, and
that gets us back to growing. We think that will be reflected in the results of growing at about 3% per year, which is our base expectation.
 
Daniel K. Schlanger
Crown Castle Inc. - Executive VP & CFO
Okay. And Dave, I'll take the prepaid rent amortization. I think you've positioned it well. This year, there was a -- if you looked at going
into 2023 at the tables and the supplements, it looked like there was going to be a big drop off. The table itself is just the book of
business that we have at the time we put the table together. It's not a forecast. And the difference between those 2 concepts of the book
of business and the forecast is as we get more prepaid or capital expenditures reimbursed to us from our customers as we build out any
type of assets, either towers or small cells. We then amortize that additional prepaid rent that we receive over the life of the contract. And
we don't project that out and put it into the table.
The table is just what do we know as of the date that we put that table up. And because of that, you will see a decline at times like this,
like we see in the tower business specifically. And that decline will be offset by -- in 2023, whatever additional reimbursement, capital
reimbursements we get from our customers that will then be amortized over the life of those contracts. And typically speaking, those --
the life of our contracts are in the range of 10 years.
So that would be the only thing that would offset a reduction going from '22 into 2023 is the additional capital that we're going to get
reimbursed for. And as I mentioned in my comments earlier, we think our total capital expenditures in 2023 will be about $1.2 billion to
$1.5 billion, and the net capital expenditures will be about $1 billion. So that's about $450 million of capital that we anticipate we'll get
back from our customers.
And the amortization of that will add to the table. And as you look out going forward, we continue to do -- to have those additions over
time as we get more reimbursements. But other than that, I think everything you said about the prepaid rent and then the table is exactly
right. And we do anticipate that there will be drop-offs particularly in our tower business.
 
David William Barden
BofA Securities, Research Division - MD
Got it. And as we kind of think about -- I think the earlier question about the dividend and funding the dividend and how you think about
it coming out of operating cash flow. Obviously, a lot of that cash flow coming this year is coming from the termination payments, $165
million midpoint from the Sprint situation.
In the absence of those payments being present either you'd have to have had a smaller dividend growth or you would have had to either
get more aggressive on leverage to fund it or use equity to fund it. Could you kind of walk us through your thought process on what if the
termination payments didn't exist?
 
Jay A. Brown
Crown Castle Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Sure. Let me just go back and start with how do we size the dividend, and then we can talk about the what ifs. So we sized the dividend
each year, what we look at is what do we believe the cash flows in the business are going to grow over that subsequent 12-month period
of time. And given the visibility that we have in the business, we have a really good view of what the growth is going to be over the year
because by this point, as we talked about on the tower side, 70% plus of the overall business, that's largely contracted at this point. So
we have a really good view of that.
On the small cell side, similarly, those nodes have been contracted, and we've been working on them. So we have a good sense of when
they're going to come on here. So that we start there with what do we believe, over the subsequent 12 months, the growth in cash flows
are going to be.
And then what we look at secondly is we look at what's the cash flow generation of the business over the next 12 months when we set the
dividend policy. Historically, if you go back and look at -- go back to 2017 and roll that all the way forward through the conversation that
we're having this morning, we have sized that dividend between 96% and 99% of the expected cash flows in the business for that
subsequent 12 months. And we did the exact same thing in this quarter as we released in the expectation for dividend growth and
throughout 2023.
So if we had gotten to this place and there was a different set of circumstances, a different set of facts and the cash flow generation were
different whether it was higher or lower or the expected run rate of cash flows as we exited 2023 would higher or lower than our dividend
would be higher or lower. We don't utilize the capital markets to fund our dividend.
So if the cash flows of the business were lower than the expectation we would have is that we would lower the dividend. We would not be
accessing the debt market or the equity markets to fund that, to fund that dividend.
When we think about the opportunity to invest in things, that's where we utilize the capital markets. So the comparison that we're
making there with the utilization of, as Dan mentioned, the opportunity to use growth in cash flows and EBITDA to fund growth, we look
at what's the highest and best use of that capital, and then we'll access the capital markets as appropriate to fund those opportunities.
But the dividend is funded based on the cash flow characteristics of the business, and we set the policy based on that.
 
Operator
Next, we'll hear from Phil Cusick of JPMorgan.
 
Philip A. Cusick
JPMorgan Chase & Co, Research Division - MD and Senior Analyst
I wanted to ask about the services guidance, which looks pretty steady year-over-year. Should we think of that shifting some from towers
to fiber and small cells? And is there any shift in margins as that happens?
 
Jay A. Brown
Crown Castle Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Phil, no, there's no shift. We would expect a similar contribution from towers as what we were expecting and seeing in 2022 to continue
into 2023. And no change in behavior from the carriers or margins or anything else that would cause us to lead to a different answer. So
we think we'll see a pretty similar result both in terms of revenue and margins and mix in '23.
 
Operator
And moving on to Brett Feldman of Goldman Sachs.
 
Brett Joseph Feldman
Goldman Sachs Group, Inc., Research Division - Equity Analyst
Two questions, if you don't mind. So you said during your prepared remarks that the Sprint cancellation payment you're getting are tied
to when they actually terminate leases. I guess the biggest year for the churn coming off of Sprint is going to be 2025. So does that mean
that actually in 2025, there could actually be some fairly significant cancellation payments as well?
And then the second question is it looks like you're using a bit more stock-based compensation this year. We see that in the AFFO
reconciliation. I'm curious if this is a bit of a philosophical shift in how you're looking to compensate the team going forward and if we
should be modeling out a higher run rate from here?
 
Jay A. Brown
Crown Castle Inc. - President, CEO & Director
On the first question, the Sprint cancellations, those are coming to their natural term end dates in 2025 on the tower side. So we would
not expect to receive any significant payments in 2025 from T-Mobile. The -- just to be clear about what we're receiving in 2023 are
expecting to receive in 2023, those are the cancellations of nodes that have contracted terms remaining, and so they're funding the
remaining years of those contracted payments in 2023. So it's a little bit different approach to how they're thinking about their network
between towers and small cells and why there's a difference in terms of the cash flow characteristics.
On the noncash comp, I would say -- first of all, there's no change in our philosophy in terms of the way we're thinking about percentages
or contribution of overall comp for the organization from past years. I think what you're seeing there is just a range of potential outcomes
that we put into the outlook as we look forward. So not a meaningful shift in the way that we're thinking about using stock -- using stock
as we compensate employees.
 
Operator
And next, we'll hear from Matt Niknam of Deutsche Bank.
 
Matthew Niknam
Deutsche Bank AG, Research Division - Director
Just two, if I could. First, on the Sprint cancellation payments. Any color you can share on the cadence of those payments, how they roll in
over the course of next year and maybe the allocation of those payments between small cells and fiber solutions.
And then secondly, maybe a bigger picture question. We've seen a couple of announcements from cable around starting to build out
some of their own spectrum to supplement their MVNOs. I'm just wondering if you can comment on how meaningful this can be for your
business given your ownership of both towers and small cells.
 
Daniel K. Schlanger
Crown Castle Inc. - Executive VP & CFO
Thanks, Matt. On the [EPLs], the payments will happen as Jay mentioned, when those contracts ultimately get canceled. They'll likely be
at the beginning of the year, we think. But we are not in control of that specifically. So we'll wait and see, and we'll let you know, but it
could happen through the course of the year or it may happen closer to the beginning of the year.
The majority of the cancellations are going to be in the small cell business. So I would just say that there's more than half in small cells,
less than half of fiber solutions.
 
Jay A. Brown
Crown Castle Inc. - President, CEO & Director
On your second question around cable, we're certainly working with the various cable companies as they are thinking about their mobile
strategy and have seen some benefit both on towers as well as small cells. I think we will continue to see that over time. I believe that we
have an opportunity for that to be a growing component of our revenue growth.
Broadly, without just being completely limited to cable companies, there are a lot of institutions that are -- and organizations that are
thinking about their mobile strategy. And so we have seen an uptick in the last couple of years of customers outside of what you would
traditionally think of as the big 4 operators, the big 4 carriers, leasing space on towers and also small cells. And we think that's a growing
opportunity, one we're focused on capturing as much of that demand as possible.
I wouldn't describe it in our -- either our current results 2022 or what we expect in 2023 as being material. But it is a growing segment
and I think it gives us opportunity for future growth into years 2024 and beyond.
 
Operator
And moving on to Nick Del Deo of MoffettNathanson.
 
Nicholas Ralph Del Deo
MoffettNathanson LLC - Senior Analyst
First, for Dan, can you just show the expected dollars of churn and expected dollars of escalation for towers in '23? How do those
alongside the leasing number would be helpful?
 
Daniel K. Schlanger
Crown Castle Inc. - Executive VP & CFO
Yes. So leasing, as we talked about, I'll give you kind of midpoints to try to help with that is around $140 million on towers, on escalators
it should be in the neighborhood of $90 million, and on churn it should be in the neighborhood of [$35 million].
 
Nicholas Ralph Del Deo
MoffettNathanson LLC - Senior Analyst
Okay. Great. And then on the small cell front, I think you've historically said that anchor small cell nodes typically cost about $100,000
each from a gross CapEx perspective and obviously a fraction of that for co-locations. I guess in light of the inflation we've seen and some
of the expense pressures you've called out. Are those averages still about right? And if there has been any upward pressure there, are you
seeing any pushback from getting corresponding lease rates up or customers kind of accepting it?
 
Daniel K. Schlanger
Crown Castle Inc. - Executive VP & CFO
Yes, Nick. Thanks for the question. We've used $100,000 as a proxy to try to help people understand the quantum that affects our
financial statements. But the way these agreements are priced is based on yield our expected yield. So when we build nodes, we're
typically seeing a 6% to 7% initial yield on invested capital, and then growing that invested capital, as I referred to in some of my
comments around what we think in 2023, the percentage of co-located nodes into that high single-digit yields once we get to the second
tenant, low double-digit yield as we get to a 2-tenant system.
So we're pricing, think about customer contracts, the way the actual contracted rate of revenue works itself out through the combination
of both upfront funded capital from the carrier and then the ongoing rents being driven more by the yields required to get to the levels
that I just described. And that $100,000 is more theoretical than it is anything else. Each system is differently priced and it's priced to a
return.
So the inflationary pressures that you're referring to are absolutely have absolutely happened. They have a similar and direct impact on
what we received from the customer and from -- in terms of upfront capital as well as where the rental rate on those nodes once they're
built.
 
Nicholas Ralph Del Deo
MoffettNathanson LLC - Senior Analyst
Okay. Okay. You've been able to, again, push that sort of in pricing to sustain your yields at your historical levels?
 
Daniel K. Schlanger
Crown Castle Inc. - Executive VP & CFO
Correct.
 
Operator
And next, we'll hear from Brandon Nispel of KeyBanc Capital Markets.
 
Brandon Lee Nispel
KeyBanc Capital Markets Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
Two, 1 for Dan, 1 for Jay. Going back to Michael's question, $140 million in tower leasing. How should that trend throughout the year? Is it
linear? Is it first half, second half weighted? That was the Dan.
Jay, second question is just on overall backlogs in the small cell business. You've been stuck at 60,000 nodes for a year. And obviously,
you have like multiple years to build those nodes at 10,000 a year to really work through that backlog. But how should we expect the
backlog to build really over the next 12 to 18 months, if at all?
 
Daniel K. Schlanger
Crown Castle Inc. - Executive VP & CFO
I'll take the first one. Thanks. The tower leasing is pretty ratable through the course of the year. I wouldn't call out any difference between
the first half or the second half that goes through the course of the year.
 
Jay A. Brown
Crown Castle Inc. - President, CEO & Director
On your second question around small cell builds and the backlog, I think this is a business that's going to likely forever be very different
than what we've seen with towers, where there's more a consistent level of activity with towers where we see the backlog build and grow
at a more consistent pace. Small cells by their nature, because of the number of them that have to be deployed and how they're deployed
at the market level I think we'll always see kind of lumpy orders.
And the work that we're doing now with customers is in part working on deploying all the commitments that they've given us, as you
referenced the 60,000 commitment that we received from Verizon and T-Mobile. We're also working with them as they think about the
next leg of small cells and what they're going to need in the next part of the densification of their network. And so while it hasn't resulted
in orders yet, those are the conversations that we're working on with them across multiple, multiple markets.
So my expectation for how will it build if you take a really long-term view, Brandon, on your question, my long-term view is the total
number of small cells in the backlog will go up and to the right. And over time, we'll see this business continue to scale and grow, but I
don't think we're likely to see that business have a backlog where it's a steady change every quarter to quarter.
I think we'll see some lumpiness in as we get large commitments from the carriers and visibility towards what their future build is and
then we go through the process of working on it with them and then figure out what's next on their agenda for densification around the
network.
I think it's just the nature of the way the business is going to work.
Operator, maybe we have time for one more question.
 
Operator
Yes, sir. Our final question will come from Greg Williams of Cowen.
 
Gregory Bradford Williams
Cowen and Company, LLC, Research Division - Director
First one is on the small cell CapEx. Obviously, you're doing a good job leveraging existing nodes with over half of the nodes. And I've
heard in the past, those CapEx efficiencies could be up to [4:1]. What's a good run rate as we think about beyond '23 of how often you
could leverage existing notes? Is it going to be around that 50% plus I imagine it goes way down as you have to greenfield additional
nodes.
Second question is just around the fiber M&A landscape. You probably get color on funding the dividend just with cash, but when you go
out and grow, you'll tap the debt markets or equity markets, obviously, not a good time now, but multiples are also coming down quite a
bit in the fiber space we're hearing. So just trying to understand your practice and what you're seeing in the fiber M&A landscape, should
you go out and need additional fiber.
 
Jay A. Brown
Crown Castle Inc. - President, CEO & Director
You bet, Greg. Thanks for the question. On your first question, our last several years, if we look at the percentage of co-locations, we've
been in and around 20% to 30% of the total activity that we've seen has been in the form of co-location. And as I mentioned in my
comments and you referred to, we expect in 2023 that about 50% of the activity will be co-location. If you roll that forward into the future
years, we've talked about that the vast majority of the nodes that were committed by T-Mobile's 35,000 node commitments that they
made. The vast majority of those will be co-located on existing fiber systems. So a vast majority of those are co-locations. And then on
the Verizon commitment, we think that's a mix of new markets and co-location.
So we'll get some of both. But based on the current backlog, that would tend towards that higher percentage of co-location. So driving
CapEx efficiencies and increases the return on the systems. And we're continuing to see, as I said in my earlier comments, really
encouraging trend lines when we get down to the system levels of seeing the returns come -- the incremental returns come in where we
expected when we underwrote those investments.
So really encouraged by that story starting to shape up more and more like the tower model and what we've seen historically as we get
scale in towers and then grow the returns through the acquisition process.
The second question around fiber M&A. We've been really careful about what we've looked to acquire. In order to be interesting to us
with an acquisition. The fiber strands has to be high capacity and they need to be located in densely populated areas that we believe
there is going to be significant small cell opportunity in order to grow those returns.
To date, as evidenced by the fact we haven't done any acquisitions since 2017. We have not found any acquisitions that meet that criteria.
And at this point, we continue to believe that the vast majority of the opportunity is going to be through organic builds rather than
acquisition.
So we'll continue to look and pay attention to what's out there. And if there's an opportunity that makes sense, we would consider it. But
-- and we think it's much more likely that we'll be an organic builder of the fiber that will be needed for small cells for the carrier
customers rather than in acquisition mode in order to gain that fiber.
Well, thanks, everyone, for joining us this morning. Appreciate the time, and we look forward to catching up with you soon.
 
Operator
And that does conclude today's conference. We thank you for your participation. Have a wonderful day.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.