CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
Adam E. Paul
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - President, CEO & Trustee
 
Alison Harnick
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - Senior VP, General Counsel & Corporate Secretary
 
Jordan Robins
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - Executive VP & COO
 
Neil William Edward Downey
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - Executive VP of Enterprise Strategies & CFO
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
Dean Mark Wilkinson
CIBC Capital Markets, Research Division - Director of Institutional Equity Research
 
Mario Saric
Scotiabank Global Banking and Markets, Research Division - Analyst
 
Pammi Bir
RBC Capital Markets, Research Division - Analyst
 
Sam Damiani
TD Securities Equity Research - Director of Institutional Equity Research
 
Tal Woolley
National Bank Financial, Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for standing by. Welcome to the First Capital REIT's Q3 2022 Results Conference Call. (Operator
Instructions) I would now like to turn the meeting over to Alison. Please proceed with your presentation.
 
Alison Harnick
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - Senior VP, General Counsel & Corporate Secretary
Thank you, and good afternoon, everyone. In discussing our financial and operating performance and in responding to your questions
during today's call, we may make forward-looking statements. These statements are based on our current estimates and assumptions,
many of which are beyond our control and are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ
materially from those expressed or implied in these forward-looking statements.
A summary of these underlying assumptions, risks and uncertainties is contained in our various securities filings, including our Q3 MD&A,
our MD&A for the year ended December 31, 2021, and our current AIF, which are available on SEDAR and our website.
These forward-looking statements are made as of today's date and except as required by securities law, we undertake no obligation to
publicly update or revise any such statements. During today's call, we will also be referencing certain financial measures that are
non-IFRS measures. These do not have standardized meanings prescribed by IFRS and should not be construed as alternatives to net
income or cash flow from operating activities determined in accordance with IFRS. Management provides these measures as a
complement to IFRS measures to aid in assessing the REIT's performance. These non-IFRS measures are further defined and discussed
in our MD&A, which should be read in conjunction with this call.
I'll now turn the call over to Adam.
 
Adam E. Paul
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - President, CEO & Trustee
Okay. Thank you very much, Alison. Good afternoon, everyone, and thank you for joining us today for our Q3 earnings conference call. In
addition to Alison, with me today are several members of the FCR team, including Neil Downey and Jordie Robins, who you will hear
from shortly. Before we get into the quarterly results, I'll start with commenting on some of the strategy work that the Board and
management team have recently announced. On September 15, we followed through with our promise to unitholders and announced the
full restoration and doubling of our distribution. Going back to January of 2021, the Board made the decision to reduce the distribution by
50%. We were clear at the time that this would be temporary and was being done to provide the trust with additional financial flexibility
in the face of new government mandated COVID-related closures in several regions in which we operate.
We were also clear that subject to the duration and ultimate economic impact of the pandemic, the Board believed the reduction would
be in place for a period spanning approximately 2 years. There were several factors behind our decision to restore the distribution last
month. Firstly, the impact of COVID on our business is now behind us. This is supported by the fact that for several quarters now, we have
reported strong and improving operating results.
Second, and this may not be fully appreciated, given our tax profile, we have very little flexibility other than to restore our distribution
without compromising our REIT status. And finally, this announcement fulfilled the pledge that we made to unitholders nearly 2 years
ago. Last month, we announced the details of our enhanced capital allocation and portfolio optimization plan. This plan is the outcome
of months of work by management and the Board on how best to unlock the value we have created over the past few years.
Notwithstanding headwinds such as the pandemic, high inflation and rapidly rising interest rates, FCR has delivered above average NAV
per unit growth over the last number of years. This growth is a function of our best-in-class portfolio and operating platform that has
continued to deliver peer-leading same-property NOI, lease renewal lifts and rental rate growth. It is also the result of the strategic
decisions that we made, including the sale of $1.5 billion of specific assets from 2019 to 2021, most of which were sold either because we
chose to exit secondary markets or sold properties in which we felt we had maximized their value and chose to reallocate that capital to
more productive uses.
A major contributor to our strong NAV growth is our density pipeline. We have rezoned over 8 million square feet of space with another 9
million square feet currently underway in Canada's most desirable neighborhoods. While the contribution to net asset value has been
strong, the cumulative impact of this industry-leading development pipeline creates a short- to medium-term drag on EBITDA and FFO,
while also adversely impacting our debt metrics, which is why balance is so important in this regard.
As a result of the hard work and sweat equity of our team over the last few years, we now have an abundance of assets that are prime for
either development or monetization. Executing our monetization plan will ensure our capital is allocated in ways that drive the most
value for our unitholders over the short, medium and long term. It will also rebalance FCR's portfolio to a higher proportion of
income-producing assets that contribute to key metrics such as EBITDA, FFO and our debt metrics.
In summary, our portfolio composition to date is overweight long-term development opportunities for a public company. The depth and
scale of our development pipeline is massive by any standard. At 24 million square feet, it is larger in size than our total existing GLA or
built portfolio. We are now in a position to utilize these assets to further enhance our short- to medium-term objectives while maintaining
and to finance our attractive long-term trajectory.
Our plan includes the monetization of more than $1 billion of low or no yielding assets over the next 2 years. This is a large and impactful
number, but it includes only 1/4 of our density pipeline, leaving an opportunity with respect to more than 17 million square feet of future
space. A smaller portion of the assets we intend to monetize will not be development assets, but instead will be low-yielding
income-producing properties in which our short- to medium-term value-enhancing goals have been achieved.
The King High Line residential property sale is a great example. This recently completed development has a stabilized occupancy level,
and it offers no additional intensification opportunities. To be clear, this is a great asset in a great neighborhood, but that is not enough
to keep our capital invested. Selling the property at a sub 3% cap rate and an attractive premium to IFRS NAV affords us the opportunity
to reinvest that capital in significantly higher return endeavors, which today includes our NCIB.
What is not in our $1 billion monetization pool, our stable cash flow and grocery-anchored assets, which we now own only in top-tier
neighborhoods with the best demographics in the country. Therefore, as we execute this program, our weighting of these core assets will
continue to increase.
Our FFO more than covers our reinstated distribution, all maintenance CapEx and all revenue-enhancing CapEx. Therefore, the entire $1
billion plus of monetizations will be allocated to other more productive uses. Specifically, at least $400 million to repay debt with the
balance allocated to both our NCIB and expected development investments through the end of 2024. Neil will walk through the details
of the quarter, but to summarize, it's one of the strongest quarters we've had.
I'm the first to say that a quarter does not make a trend. But when stringing Q3 together with the operating results we have delivered for
several quarters in a row now, it is clear that the hard work of our talented team, coupled with our strategic focus on high-quality
grocery-anchored properties located within Canadian neighborhoods with the most compelling demographic profiles, continues to
deliver solid operating results. Leasing is critical to our business, and it's been a bright spot for FCR through various economic cycles and
world events.
The strength we've demonstrated for some time now continued in the third quarter with nearly 750,000 square feet of leasing across 170
transactions at very healthy rent increases. This contributed to solid same-property NOI growth of 5.3% or 3.4% without bad debts and
lease termination fees for those who prefer to exclude them.
We also completed dispositions and made investments during the quarter to advance our real estate strategy and our development
program specifically, which Jordie will review. We remain active on additional dispositions that are consistent with our enhanced capital
allocation and portfolio optimization plan. Finally, I would like to provide an update on our ESG initiatives. We recently released our 2021
ESG report, marking our 12th year in publishing our results, and I'm pleased with the progress we are making executing on our
commitments.
From a sustainability perspective, we exceeded our stated 3-year target of a 9% decrease in greenhouse gas emissions, achieving a 12.7%
reduction, and we once again achieved a 4-star rating in the 2022 GRES real estate assessment. For the third consecutive year, we
achieved prime status for corporate ESG performance by ISS. And across the portfolio, we continue to invest in sustainable infrastructure.
We now have over 250 electric vehicle charging stations installed across 76 properties with a commitment to install an additional 200
next year. Our head office building at 85 Hanna Avenue and our Brooklyn Town Center were awarded the Outstanding Building of the
Year Award from Boma-Canada in their respective categories.
Also at 85 Hanna, at the entrance to the shops at King Liberty, we recently installed our first indigenous art piece by celebrated
Anishinaabe artist, Que Rock, entitled Biindigen, which means welcome. This brings a total of 31 public art installations in our
long-standing public art program. And to close my remarks today, I would like to make a special mention of FCR's Thriving
Neighborhood Foundation, volunteer team, who hosted the first annual commercial real estate softball classic tournament in support of
Kids Help Phone. Together with some of our real estate friends and partners, we raised over $100,000 for this important charity focused
on kids' mental health. It was a great day for a great cause. Thank you to everyone who made this day happen.
So overall, a very busy quarter with healthy and strengthening operating metrics. Before I pass it over to Neil, one thing I did want to say
is that the Board is committed to listening and responding appropriately to unitholders in accordance with its fiduciary duties and the
best interest of all unitholders. As always, we strongly encourage constructive unitholder feedback and input. We believe the best form
for this is for unitholders to engage directly with management and the Board. Since the purpose of today's quarterly call is to discuss our
quarterly results, I respectfully request that questions in the Q&A period of this call focus on the quarter and our real estate strategy. And
with that, I will now pass things over to Neil.
 
Neil William Edward Downey
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - Executive VP of Enterprise Strategies & CFO
Thanks, Adam, and good afternoon, everyone. For my prepared remarks today, I will be referring to our quarterly conference call
presentation, which is available on the website at fcr.ca. The third quarter themes are simple. First Capital's operating metrics were solid
and the bottom-line earnings growth was very strong. Regarding the latter, Q3 2022 funds from operations of $66.6 million increased by
13% from $59 million in the prior year. FCR's weighted average unit count during the third quarter was 216 million units, due principally
to activity under the REIT's normal course issuer repurchase program, the unit count was 5 million units or 2% lower in Q3 versus the
prior year. As such, FFO on a per unit basis posted a growth rate of 15% to $0.31 in the third quarter of this year versus $0.27 in the third
quarter of last year.
In providing some context and highlights with respect to the Q3 results, let's walk through the FFO statement. Starting at the top of Slide
6 of the conference call presentation, Q3 net operating income of $109.5 million increased by $5.4 million or 5% from $104 million last
year. Higher base rents from new and renewal leasing and higher contributions from variable revenue sources were the 2 most significant
drivers of NOI growth.
Also contributing was a $1.1 million reduction in bad debt expense. Lost NOI related to disposition activity was $2.2 million. Lease
termination receipts of $407,000 in Q3 were consistent to the same amount in the prior year. Q3 same-property NOI growth was $5.1
million, equating to a strong 5.3% increase. The year-over-year growth was driven primarily by higher base rents and higher variable
revenue contributions as well as a $1.8 million decrease in same-property bad debt expense.
Excluding the bad debt expense and the lease termination fees, Q3 same-property NOI growth increased by a solid 3.4%. Taking a
moment to look at sequential results. Q3 NOI was $2.3 million or 2% higher than Q2's $107 million. There are several key underlying
factors. Higher variable revenues contributed $2.6 million to NOI growth. Lease termination fees increased by $400,000
quarter-over-quarter, and these were partially offset by lost NOI related to disposition activity of $600,000. Turning to interest and other
income of $4.9 million in the third quarter. This was an increase of 83% from $2.7 million in Q3 of 2021.
Within this number, fee and other income of $1.3 million in the quarter was consistent with the prior year. However, interest and
investment income of $3.4 million tripled from $1.1 million in Q3 of 2021. The key drivers of the higher interest and investment income
included higher loan balances at $240 million at September 30, 2022 versus $180 million at September 30 of the prior year as well as an
increase in the loan books weighted average interest rate to 6.7% this year, up from 5.5% last year.
At September 30, about 60% of the mortgages and loans receivables were at fixed interest rates and 40% were floating. By year-end this
year, we currently estimate the scheduled repayments could result in our loans receivable balance declining by about 30% or $70
million. We believe our mortgage and loan portfolio offers good protection against higher interest rates. Based on last week's increase in
the prime rate to 5.95% and based upon the scheduled repayments and floating rate exposures, we currently estimate the weighted
average interest rate could further increase to around 8% by early 2023. At the G&A expense line and below, there's a bit more noise in
our Q3 results than is normally the case. To provide a bit of color, let's start with Q3 G&A expenses, which were $10.9 million. This is an
increase of $3.1 million on a year-over-year basis and $2.2 million sequentially from Q2.
The Q3 expense is higher than our quarterly run rate of approximately $9 million, which is the number we formally guided to. We're
always seeking ways to streamline our processes and improve the efficiency of our operations. And in this regard, our Q3 corporate
expenses did include approximately $1.5 million in employee severance and restructuring costs.
Below the G&A line in amortization expense, we also charged off about $300,000 for software applications that have reached their
useful life. So, the sum total of these costs, including the accelerated amortization, tallied to about a $1.8 million charge to Q3 FFO.
Going the other way, contributing to FFO, you will also see that we recorded a $2.9 million credit to abandon transaction costs. This line
item is normally an expense in any given quarter. However, during Q3, we did take into income a purchaser deposit related to a property
sale that was not completed.
So bringing all these amounts together, there was a net contribution or benefit to FFO of approximately $1.3 million during the quarter.
That's about $0.006 on a per unit basis. Turning to Slide 7. You can see FCR's 9-month 2022 results and the prior year comparatives. I'll
be brief with 4 points of note. Total net operating income of $318 million increased by $9 million or 3% year-over-year. This is despite $6
million of lost income due to net asset sales and $1 million lower lease termination fees. Therefore, growth was driven by an aggregate
contribution of $16 million from higher base rents, lower bad debt and higher NOI from variable revenue sources. Secondly, the
year-to-date interest and other income of $15 million has doubled as the mortgage and loan book has grown and we're now benefiting
from higher interest rates. Thirdly, interest expense of $111 million is 4% lower year-over-year due to lower debt balances.
However, the effect of higher interest rates as of Q3, in particular, they're now just starting to bite. And finally, our FFO, prior to other
gains, losses and expenses of $193 million, it's $20 million or 12% higher year-over-year. On the same basis, this drove the per unit
results to $0.88 cumulatively for the year, up $0.10 per unit also equating to 12% growth. Moving through to some of our Q3 operating
performance metrics on Slide 9, portfolio rounded out the quarter with an occupancy of 95.7%. This is consistent with 95.6% at the end
of Q2 of 2022, and it's a modest 20 basis points lower on a year-over-year basis. During the second quarter -- the third quarter, pardon
me, we had 162,000 square feet of tenant possessions against 134,000 square feet of closures. In addition, we had 34,000 square feet of
GLA subject to closures for redevelopment.
Moving to Slide 10, we turn to the subject of leasing velocity. And on this front, the Q3 volume and spreads were strong. Q3 renewal
leasing volumes of 556,000 square feet were 19% higher than 466,000 square feet in the third quarter of last year. Q3 renewal leases
were affected at an average increase of 10.4% when measuring the first year of the renewal rent of $22.16 per square foot relative to the
$20.08 per square foot in the final year of the expiring leases. Now notably, the Q3 activity did include a 98,000 square foot early
renewal of a Walmart lease. So within our very good Q3 leasing renewal spread of 10.4%, about 19% of the total renewal volume was at a
flat rental rate.
Including new leasing for future possession, total Q3 leasing velocity at FCR share was 669,000 square feet. On a platform basis, the
total third quarter new and renewal leasing volume was 743,000 square feet, bringing activity at 2.6 million square feet for the first 9
months. Also, as we referenced on Slide 10, our average in-place portfolio net rent reached $22.80 at September 30. FCR's in place net
rent per square foot continues to make new highs. Growth during the third quarter was $0.08 per square foot and on a year-over-year
basis, it was $0.56 per square foot or 2.5%. Regarding the latter, rent escalations and renewal lifts provided 75% of the growth in rent
per square foot.
Slide 11 provides distribution payout ratio metrics on an FFO and AFFO basis. Our Q3 2022 AFFO payout ratio was 57%. Due to the
doubling of the monthly distribution in the month of September, this quarterly payout ratio increased by 12 percentage points from Q3 of
2021. On a go-forward basis, based upon the 86% annualized distribution per unit, you should expect our AFFO payout ratio to move
towards upwards into the 80s.
Advancing to Slide 13, the REIT's net asset value per unit at September 30 was $23.47. This was a decrease of $0.99 per unit or
approximately 4% relative to June 30, and it places our net asset value approximately 3% lower from the beginning of the year. The
change in the Q3 NAV had 3 major components. The first is a $272 million fair value loss on investment properties. This reduced our NAV
by $1.23 per unit. Second influential factor was our retained cash flow after paying our distribution, which added approximately $36
million or $0.16 to the Q3 NAV. And the third factor was our NCIB activity, which added approximately $0.05 per unit during the quarter,
and I might add $0.24 per unit on a year-to-date basis.
Turning back to the property revaluations for a moment. To disaggregate the Q3 fair value loss, I can frame the situation through 3
component parts. The first component relates to changes in individual asset level cash flow estimates. During the third quarter, we
updated or changed cash flow models for 81 individual properties, which resulted in a net fair value decrease of $36 million. Now relative
to $9.1 billion of total investment properties, this valuation decrease is essentially a rounding error and it signals that we see stability in
the performance of our assets. Second element relates to the contracted sale of our 50% interest in the residential component King High
line, -- the $149 million sale price was more than $12 million above our Q2 IFRS value.
And thirdly, we recorded a $248 million net fair value loss related to changes in valuation assumptions, specifically higher stabilized cap
rates, higher terminal cap rates and higher discount rates. In contrast to our second quarter results, the valuation modeling assumption
changes during Q3 were much more broad-brushed. In total, they impacted 120 properties, where stabilized cap rates on individual
assets were typically increased between 25 and 50 basis points.
In our MD&A disclosures, you can see that the portfolio's stabilized weighted average cap rate increased to 5.1% at September 30 from
5.0% at June 30. For those of you who really like the detail, if I take you beyond the one decimal place of rounding, the change in the Q3
stabilized cap rate during the quarter was actually an increase of 13 basis points. And for those of you who like the shortcut valuation
approach, the $248 million fair value markdown arising from changes in valuation metrics, this equates to an increase of approximately
15 basis points on the portfolio's weighted average going in cap rate.
Providing an update on capital deployment as summarized on Slide 14, we invested $47 million into development leasing and residential
development during Q3. Most of this capital was invested into assets located in Toronto, Montreal and Vancouver. Also in Q3, we
invested $21 million to repurchase approximately 1.4 million trust units under our NCIB, bringing year-to-date purchases to September
30 to $91 million. On a 9 month-to-date basis, 2022 CapEx has totaled $119 million, including $70 million into development and
residential inventory mostly due to project timing and commencement dates, we're now guiding towards full year 2022
development-related CapEx of approximately $100 million.
All other capital expenditures, including revenue sustaining, revenue enhancing and recoverable CapEx should be in the $65 million to
$75 million range. Turning to Slide 15. There was very little in the way of financing activity during Q3. On Slide 16 of the presentation, you
will see a summary of some of our debt metrics. FCR continues to demonstrate stability and strength in key balance sheet metrics. As at
September 30, total liquidity was $859 million. Excluding construction facilities, quarter end general corporate liquidity on our revolvers
was $625 million. The REIT ended the third quarter with a sizable $6.8 billion pool of unencumbered assets, albeit down from $7.1 billion
at midyear due to Q3 asset sales and fair value adjustments.
On Slide 17, you see a graphical depiction of FCR's staggered debt maturity profile. Looking through the year-end, I previously alluded to
the capital that we expect to have returned from our loans and mortgages receivable over the coming months. In addition, we have $149
million of gross proceeds or $69 million of net proceeds coming from our King High Line residential sale. And finally, we anticipate
placing $200 million or more of long-term fixed rate mortgages prior to year-end.
Collectively, these capital sources will be applied to fund the $250 million contractual maturity of our Series P senior unsecured
debentures on December 5 and to recharge our credit lines. So in this regard, we expect that our debt metrics and our liquidity position
will further strengthen into year-end. This concludes my prepared remarks. I will now turn the call to FCR Chief Operating Officer, Jordie
Robins, provide some commentary on property investments, operations and development.
 
Jordan Robins
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - Executive VP & COO
Thanks, Neil, and good afternoon. I am really pleased that the positive momentum in our business seen over the past several quarters
continued into Q3. This positive momentum is no accident. It's a direct result of the strength of our high-quality grocery-anchored
portfolio and the effectiveness of our dedicated team who continue to perform at the highest level every day. To start with, Q3 was a very
busy period for our investment team. We have sold or have a firm agreement in place to sell approximately $250 million of assets at low
cap rates. This quarter, we sold Baby Lane Plaza, a strip center located in Markham, Ontario for $35 million. After our addition of a
freestanding Starbucks pad, there was a little more we could do to enhance its value.
So we took the property to market and sold it to a private buyer for a price that was more than 50% above our IFRS value. This quarter,
we also sold Porte de Gatineau center located in Gatineau, Quebec, to a private local buyer at a double-digit premium to our IFRS value.
This asset does not form part of our $1 billion enhanced capital allocation and portfolio optimization plan. It was a remnant center that
was a geographic and qualitative outlier of our portfolio. We had explored its sale in the past, but it wasn't until recently, and we were
able to secure premium pricing, which we require to transact.
As Adam touched on in his formal remarks, last month, we entered into a binding agreement to sell our remaining 50% interest in our
King High Line residential property for $149 million. This is a great asset in a great neighborhood, and we've retained ownership of the
155,000 square feet of premium grocery-anchored retail space. Notwithstanding our enhanced capital allocation plans, we remain
opportunistic, but selective with respect to acquiring assets. We have a proven track record in surfacing and unlocking value that others
may not see or underwrite.
A good example of this is our purchase of a 50% interest in Amberlea Shopping Center located in Pickering, Ontario. We purchased this
100,000 square foot open-air shopping center anchored by a high-performing metro grocery store for only $450 per square foot. This
price is approximately 60% of its replacement cost. It's attractive market price relative to its replacement cost, was only one of its
compelling features. Amberlea is located only 1.4 kilometers from FCR Steeple Hill Shopping Center.
As a result of its proximity, we have in-depth market knowledge and identified multiple levers to grow Amberlea's income by over 40%
within the next several years. As we touched on our last call, this quarter, we also purchased a small but strategic asset on Montgomery
Avenue in North Toronto that completes our 13 property assembly. We have already submitted our OPA and rezoning application for this
property, and we'll update you on its progress next quarter.
As set in our disclosures, as at September 30, we had $320 million in assets held for sale. This includes the residential component of
King High Line. We made good progress through the third quarter on the sale of these assets. We have also advanced several other
identified disposition opportunities at premium pricing. We expect to be able to share the details of this progress with you in coming
months. Our development team continues to advance entitlements for the 24 million square feet of incremental density in our pipeline.
This past quarter, we filed an application for 895 Lawrence Avenue East. The application contemplates 412,000 square foot mixed-use
building, which will replace the existing 29,000 square foot building.
At Morningside Crossing in the east end of Toronto, we filed a rezoning application on a discrete portion of the site. The application
contemplates the replacement of an existing 7,000 square foot pad with a new 410,000 square foot mixed-use building. Our
development application at Yonge & Roselawn in Central Toronto is also progressing very well. Last quarter, we received our final zoning
order in shining the approved density and built form and allowing the next phase of our development to begin.
Rather than restrict access to the site over the summer, while awaiting receipt of our shoring and excavation permit, we sponsored
fairgrounds, and on-site community-focused racket club. This temporary club has garnered tremendous goodwill and help transform our
site into a publicly accessible sports and social activation area. The Club, which doesn't require membership includes 5 pickleball courts
and food and beverage facilities. Fairgrounds will continue operating through the fall, and our shoring and excavation will be completed
as scheduled in spring 2023.
Finally, at 2150 Lake Shore in South Atoka Co, our final zoning builds were approved by City Council marking another important
milestone on its path to redevelopment. To date, we have submitted for entitlements on 17 million square feet of incremental density,
representing 71% of our 24 million square foot pipeline. For the balance of 2022, we are gearing up to submit for another 400,000
square feet of incremental density. Today, over 8.25 million square feet of our development pipeline is now entitled with a further
700,000 square feet of approvals expected by year-end 2022. Even after the sale of the density contemplated in our enhanced capital
allocation and portfolio optimization plan, we will still possess more than 17 million square feet of incremental density in our residual
pipeline. With this remaining density, we preserve our medium and our long-term optionality. Specifically, we can sell a partial or a 100%
interest in this density.
We can develop it as part of our active development program or we can simply wait and continue to benefit from the income in place.
Regardless, the incremental density once developed will support the neighborhood in which we have invested. Our active development
program also progressed well through the quarter. At 200 Esplanade in North Vancouver, we are now 97% tendered on our 75-unit
rental building, which is on schedule for a late 2023 delivery. At Cedarbrae Mall in Toronto, the extensive renovation to the former
Walmart store is well underway and on schedule for delivery in the second half of 2023.
Most of this large new format space will be tenanted by nationals, some of whom will be relocated from 3434 Lawrence, our 35,000
square foot retail center located just across the road. You'll recall, we have submitted a rezoning application contemplating
approximately 485,000 square feet of density on the 3434 Lawrence property. In addition to improving the aesthetic and the
merchandising mix at Cedarbrae, by relocating tenants from 3434, we will simultaneously remove the lease encumbrances that would
otherwise impact the ability to redevelop 3434 Lawrence.
This will significantly increase the property's value. Concrete forming is now underway at Edenbridge, our 209-unit condominium
development located on our Humbertown shopping center lands. 88% of the units at Edenbridge are now sold. -- shoring and excavation
at 400 King Street West, our 460,000 square foot retail and residential condominium development in downtown Toronto is underway.
97% of the units there have been sold. Demolition of the existing structures on our 138 Yorkville development site is now complete, and
we expect to commence shoring and excavation later this month. As I had mentioned on our last call, we have insulated ourselves well
on our active projects from the impact of rising costs. We have secured construction financing on all of our active high-rise projects. We
have also awarded between 70% to 90% of the associated trade contracts and so have fixed a large portion of our costs.
We have also awarded 100% of the trade contracts in our 2 active retail projects at Stanley Park in Kitchener and Cedarbrae Mall in
Toronto. In summary, Q3 was a very solid quarter, highlighted by strong quarter-over-quarter metrics, including same property NOI
growth and leasing spreads. It was also a quarter where we initiated and successfully launched our $1 billion enhanced capital allocation
and portfolio optimization plan. Last, but certainly not least, we advanced our entitlement program and our active development
program. And with that, operator, we can now open it up for questions.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) And the first question is from Mario Saric.
 
Mario Saric
Scotiabank Global Banking and Markets, Research Division - Analyst
The first question, just on the $248 million fair value loss attributable to the changes in valuation parameters that you said during the
call. I was curious if you can highlight how much of that would have been applied to the $1 billion of identified dispositions as part of the
strategic plan. Eventually, I'm wondering if the fair value loss was kind of proportionate across the portfolio in the asset that you took the
fair value loss on...
 
Neil William Edward Downey
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - Executive VP of Enterprise Strategies & CFO
Mario, it's Neil. So I think we have stated in the past that there's -- there are more than 30 assets circled in that $1 billion pool that's part
of the targeted monetization assets for the next 2 years. And of course, because our Q3 fair value adjustment did reflect adjustments to a
very wide swath of properties, as I previously indicated, there were quite a number of adjustments, specifically within that pool. In fact, I
think it was more than half of the assets were subject to some sort of Q3 fair value adjustments. But I think what I can report to you,
however, and hopefully, this will give you a high level of comfort is that in that pool, specifically, the net adjustment on the -- in its
totality was actually plus $2 million...
 
Mario Saric
Scotiabank Global Banking and Markets, Research Division - Analyst
Perfect. Okay. That's great. And broadly speaking, just on the investment environment, can you discuss kind of what types of retail real
estate in particular seem to be attracting the strongest buyer interest in the market today?
 
Adam E. Paul
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - President, CEO & Trustee
Mario, it's Adam. Yes, the buyer pool has evolved as the macroeconomic environment has evolved. And so -- and we've been in the
market all the time for several years now, both looking for investment opportunities as a buyer, but especially as vendor. And there's
definitely been a shift over the last few months where the majority of the groups that we've been dealing with who are most active on the
purchasing side are the private investors. That takes various forms from private equity funds to high net worth individuals. But that's the
buyer pool.
And in terms of the assets, -- as you know, we went through a period where we had a disposition program that was specifically targeted
to improve the quality of our portfolio. And so we sold assets that we thought were best not to own. That's not the case today. Our
program is very different today given the composition of the portfolio. So what we're seeing in terms of the assets we own is pretty strong
demand across the board. So for us, it's more selective around which assets fit the strategy we've laid out and for all the reasons that
we've laid out.
 
Mario Saric
Scotiabank Global Banking and Markets, Research Division - Analyst
And within that private buyer pool, like if we were to separate assets between kind of stabilized limited residential upside over time, so
higher yielding versus kind of zone residential upside in place already versus approaching the zoning? Is there one group more so than
other 2 that would stand out in terms of what the buyers are most interested in?
 
Adam E. Paul
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - President, CEO & Trustee
Not necessarily, but you do get some variability if we were to take a stable cash flow and grocery-anchored asset, the buyer composition I
believe, would be different than something that's a development property that's just been zoned. We're not really in the market on
development assets that have not been zoned. I mean, that's one area where we've been very successful creating value. And even in
assets we've identified for disposition there's a short- to medium-term value-enhancing opportunity in assets that have rezoning
potential. And we plan to continue to take those through the rezoning, eliminate the zoning risk and benefit from the value creation of
that exercise.
 
Mario Saric
Scotiabank Global Banking and Markets, Research Division - Analyst
Got it. Okay. My last one is more of a housekeeping question. In terms of the targeted 4% FFO per unit CAGR 2021 to 2024, can you just
confirm that the base '21 number is the $1.14 that you disclosed in the statements? Or is it adjusted for something else?
 
Adam E. Paul
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - President, CEO & Trustee
Not Sorry, Mario, the base would be -- I think I have to double check about $1.75 seems to be the number that sticks in my mind. So we've
often made reference to the variability in our OGLE items. And collectively, in any given year, those have had a tendency to be substantial
contributors or detractors. So we really look past that in terms of the growth line -- the growth trend line rather.
 
Mario Saric
Scotiabank Global Banking and Markets, Research Division - Analyst
Okay. If it's anything other than that, just maybe shoot a separate e-mail and that would be great.
 
Adam E. Paul
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - President, CEO & Trustee
Will do.
 
Operator
The next question is from Sam Damiani.
 
Sam Damiani
TD Securities Equity Research - Director of Institutional Equity Research
Just the first question is just on the occupancy, what are the biggest properties holding back occupancy from returning back to that
pre-pandemic peak of 97%. And is that a goal of the company to get that occupancy back up?
 
Adam E. Paul
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - President, CEO & Trustee
Yes. There's no specific properties that I can think of. It's more pockets. And we've never been at 97% or all-time high. I guess you're
rounding, Sam, but our all-time high is 96.9% in Q4 of 2019, and then we headed into the pandemic. So this business has delivered
occupancy that ranges from 95% to 96.9% over 20-plus years. We view kind of anything in the range that we're in now is full occupancy.
We always have natural turnover.
Sometimes that turnover interrupts cash flow, but it usually leads to higher cash flow down the road. Some of the Walmarts we've
repurposed as a very good example of that. So if you take Deer Valley -- we have a Walmart that's vacated. So there's a lot, but that's one
space. So that's what it is more than a property that's got a chronic amount of vacancy. It is fairly broad-based, and we would view the
portfolio in mid- to high 95s as somewhere in the range of full occupancy depending on some of the movements that are occurring
underneath.
 
Sam Damiani
TD Securities Equity Research - Director of Institutional Equity Research
Okay. That's helpful. And just on the mixed-use rental residential pipeline with King High Line leaving the portfolio that does reduce the
collection of apartments in the portfolio. Is there a plan to replenish that? Is that a priority? How do you see that opportunity in the
marketplace today? And what sort of 2 or 3 projects would you see teeing up in the next couple of years to further that.
 
Adam E. Paul
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - President, CEO & Trustee
Yes. So for us, it was never a goal to get the portfolio to x percent residential. As you know, we continue to be involved in it. It's an area
where on the projects we've done, certainly in aggregate, we've made a lot of money on them. But it's simply capital allocation decisions
for us. And so like we said, King High Line is a great asset, but we think we can make more for our investors by reallocating that capital
elsewhere. And so we'll always continue to view where and how we invest through that lens. And we've got active projects now that
Jordie has gone through. Some of the ones that we're looking out the front window and are quite excited about our Yonge & Roselawn
project, our 1071 King project in Liberty Village and a little bit further down the road, the development at Christie Cookie.
 
Sam Damiani
TD Securities Equity Research - Director of Institutional Equity Research
Okay. And just finally, on the NCIB, has there been any activity post September 30, and you're looking at that differently today given the
increased distribution going forward?
 
Adam E. Paul
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - President, CEO & Trustee
We've been in blackout from the quarterly results post September 30. So correct me if I'm wrong, Neil, but I do not believe we have any
activity post September 30 on that basis.
 
Neil William Edward Downey
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - Executive VP of Enterprise Strategies & CFO
Yes. If there has, it has been immaterial. And I guess just more thematically, what I would say on that, Sam, is that we continue to view
the repurchase of our units as one, if not the most attractive risk-adjusted return opportunities available to us. And so our desire to
continue to buy back units is high.
And I think in this regard, I would simply reiterate comments that I think I've already consistently made in the past and that the
repurchase of units, the cadence of those repurchases will be governed by the progress on monetizing assets under our enhanced capital
allocation plan, the progress, the timing and the quantum. And obviously, secondly, the unit price itself. And then in terms of the bigger
picture on the framework, we are directionally very, very focused on achieving those balance sheet objectives that we outlined back at the
end of September in terms of key debt metrics and total debt levels. So...
 
Operator
The next question is from Pammi Bir.
 
Pammi Bir
RBC Capital Markets, Research Division - Analyst
Neil, I think you touched on it a bit. But just with respect to the reorg and the severance costs, can you maybe just elaborate on what
changes are being made? And should we perhaps anticipate any further costs in the next few quarters?
 
Neil William Edward Downey
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - Executive VP of Enterprise Strategies & CFO
As I noted earlier, this was -- it was principally severance in terms of the charge. And we're just trying to continually find ways to be more
efficient, to do things better, to empower our people to make faster, better decisions. So this was basically streamlining in that vein, if
you will. I guess what I would say maybe -- maybe this is a part where you're sort of aiming towards is that we're mindful of the fact that
we expect more travel and in-person and face-to-face business on a prospective basis. We're mindful of the fact that inflation has been
high.
Now hopefully, that peaked back in June at an 8% print, but we do know that labor is a lagging indicator and the labor market remains
tight. And so I think FCR, like many companies, is facing higher G&A expenses overall. So the restructuring was part and parcel with that.
But if you want to think about your modeling because I'm kind of anticipating your question here, but as you look out to 2023, probably
at this point, pencil in a $10 million run rate for G&A as opposed to where we have been running in the last 12 months. Quarterly run rate,
of course.
 
Pammi Bir
RBC Capital Markets, Research Division - Analyst
Right. Yes. Okay. Got it. Just looking at the renewal spreads, again, they're pretty strong. But as we do shift to lower gear in the broader
economy, are you anticipating any moderation or anything in lease maturity mix next year that might bring some of these spreads down
a bit?
 
Neil William Edward Downey
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - Executive VP of Enterprise Strategies & CFO
Absolutely not. The counter to that is replacement cost to replace that space while in most markets, we're in a theoretical given the
physical barriers to entry for new supply. But the rents that would be required to replace the space are higher than they've ever been. So
our focus is on driving those spreads higher, not maintaining or anticipating them being lowered. And given the locations that we're in
and the quality of the tenants that we have and the productivity of the space vis-a-vis the sales-generating capability of that space. yes,
we absolutely do not see a softening of the renewal spreads as we look forward. Again, I'm not talking about on a quarterly basis, but my
sense wasn't looking at a specific quarter in terms of what you were asking. So hopefully, that answers the question.
 
Pammi Bir
RBC Capital Markets, Research Division - Analyst
Yes. No, that's good color. And then just as we do look to next year's maturities and the lease profile, is there any space that you're
expecting any larger space you're expecting to perhaps get back? And should we be thinking about any downtime at all? Or is it sort of
just a routine year?
 
Neil William Edward Downey
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - Executive VP of Enterprise Strategies & CFO
It is a routine year, but that doesn't mean we don't have any large spaces that we get back. We typically get some back every year. And
Walmarts have been A good example of that in terms of our ability to repurpose the space and come out well ahead from a value and
NOI perspective, even factoring in, obviously, downtime re-leasing costs, loss gross rent during the downtime, et cetera. We do have one
out west that's -- that has been on our radar for a while, which is the Walmart and our Westmount Center. I don't think there's any others
looking around. We don't think there's any others that are coming back next year that fall into the large space. Certainly, it's a normal
year. If there's any others we miss, we'll let you know directly, Pammi.
 
Pammi Bir
RBC Capital Markets, Research Division - Analyst
Got it. And then just lastly, on the debenture maturity, I think, Neil, you mentioned that you're looking at -- or there's some $200 million
in mortgages that might be in the works. Where are you sensing that these may sort of price in or in terms of the all-in costs, if this is
something that you're planning to get done before year-end, I presume?
 
Neil William Edward Downey
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - Executive VP of Enterprise Strategies & CFO
You can use a range of 5.5% to 6.0% as a reasonable band in terms of where those should be pegged. And certainly... Longer term. So I
think 8, 9, 10-year money.
 
Operator
The next question is from Tal Woolley.
 
Tal Woolley
National Bank Financial, Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
The Ontario government came out with a revitalized housing plan. Just wondering if you guys have had any principal thoughts or
opinions delivered to you, if you can put maybe some context about how you're thinking about how it might impact how you look at
development or maybe asset sales going forward.
 
Jordan Robins
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - Executive VP & COO
It's Jordie. I think I'll take that one. What was announced, I would say to you is a very good start. And frankly, I think we at least internally
applaud the provincial government and taking what were, I'll say, meaningful steps to create more housing more quickly. I would say
notwithstanding the -- what we anticipate to be a positive impact on supply. In other words, that it will create ultimately more housing.
We think by virtue of the changes that they are contemplating to reduce both the time to and the cost of developments, it will ultimately
have a positive impact on our development value. So I would say, generally speaking, we feel good about it. I certainly indicative of what
we learned thus far. We think there's a lot of great things in it, and the Debo will continue to be in the details, obviously.
 
Tal Woolley
National Bank Financial, Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
Okay. And then just looking at your development pipeline, you've got, I think, 3 condo projects sort of in the works. And there's sort of at
various states of presale, I think like 138 your fell, not even sure you started marketing that one yet. As this environment has changed,
wondering if you can talk a little bit about presale or how you're thinking about selling strategy, the financing strategy for condos. And
not that I'm trying to like speak anything to existence, but just like maybe contingency planning to just in case the market does get a little
bit rough and you have to start closing into maybe a tougher environment?
 
Adam E. Paul
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - President, CEO & Trustee
Yes. So the 2 projects we have underway are well advanced. And so they're largely presold, and they were presold in a market where the
market value of the condos we sold continue to escalate after we sold them. We've also locked in substantially all of our costs on those 2
projects. So at this stage, we're comfortable that we're in good shape to see them through. 138 is a very different animal. And it's going to
be a very, very high-end product that is geared towards a very, very small group of what we'll call the condo purchasing universe.
And so we also feel that, that group is less sensitive to economic cycles in terms of what they are prepared to pay for that space and more
geared towards what level of luxury is delivered, what standard of service is delivered -- and we think that will actually play a larger role
in the price that the product gets sold at. So very different. We're not contemplating any other condominium starts at this point. In part,
because of our real estate strategy, also in part because of the macroeconomic backdrop that we see surrounding new condo starts
today.
 
Tal Woolley
National Bank Financial, Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
Okay. And then for the disposition or the new disposition program, you've given some idea of where the proceeds might go. Is there any
like leakage that might be in that disposition number just from like taxes or things like that, that we should be thinking about?
 
Adam E. Paul
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - President, CEO & Trustee
No. Short answer is no. No, no, you shouldn't be thinking about tax leakage in that program or the short answer to your question is no.
 
Tal Woolley
National Bank Financial, Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
Okay. And then I don't know exactly how many deals you're looking at or disposition deals you're looking at right now. Are you finding the
depth of the market is still roughly the same from where you were, say, like 18 to 24 months ago? Or are there certain kind of buyers
maybe that are, I would think maybe like the spec condo developer might not be in the market just as you're sort of sitting here saying,
like, hey, we're not going to be greenlighting anything new? Is the depth of the market changed at all?
 
Adam E. Paul
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - President, CEO & Trustee
Yes. The depth of the market certainly changed. It's shallower today than it was 18 months ago. we're focused on the one buyer that will
buy our asset at premium pricing. And so we need one of those for each asset sale. And so while the pool is shallower, it's still
constructive enough to achieve what we're trying to achieve. And so we've identified specific assets that we want to sell. We require
premium pricing to transact. We have a number of transactions in progress beyond what's been announced. And we feel very confident
today that the market is constructive enough for us to achieve what we're trying to achieve.
 
Tal Woolley
National Bank Financial, Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
Okay. And then just lastly on the debt strategy. You sort of talked about some mortgages with some serious term on it 8 to 10 years. I'm
just wondering like have you thought like given that the weighted average turn to maturity has kind of started to come down a bit, but
rates are rising, like are you -- do you think the right thing to do right now is to continue to try and stretch that term? Or I'm just
wondering if it's a different time like the rate environment has changed, how you're sort of thinking about the term on your balance
sheet?
 
Adam E. Paul
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - President, CEO & Trustee
Yes. No Tal, it's an excellent question. The flip side is with short rates being comparatively high versus long rates. There's also, I think, a
strong rationale to really carry no debt on your overnight basis around your revolvers today. So reaching for some term is always a risk
mitigation strategy in real estate. So the longer-term money makes sense in that vein. It makes sense in the vein that your point being
our term to maturity has shortened over time, and that's principally rather been a function of us being a net seller of assets. So in short,
we're going to maintain a very strong liquidity position. We will probably be extending some term loans as well over the next 6 to 12
months. And then selectively, we'll be placing mortgage -- longer-term mortgage financing. So it's about balance, it's about liquidity
strength in the environment today.
But the important point to note Tal is, which I know you're an advocate of reduced leverage, which we have been doing. And it's easier to
keep your ladder longer when you're refinancing debt. When you're paying off debt when it comes to maturity, like we have been, in many
cases, you're inherently going to shorten the latter.
 
Operator
The next question is from Dean Wilkinson.
 
Dean Mark Wilkinson
CIBC Capital Markets, Research Division - Director of Institutional Equity Research
Neil, on the $1 billion that's been identified, should we be thinking of average size of that of $30 million, give or take? Or is there a wide
spectrum there and maybe some larger assets in that pool?
 
Neil William Edward Downey
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - Executive VP of Enterprise Strategies & CFO
Well, Dean, as you know, when you talk about averages, invariably, you spend your time above the average or below the average, even
though there's such thing as an average. So we did identify the fact that there's more than 30 assets. So if you take $1 billion and you buy
it by 30 something, you're going to get the average. But truth be told, there's a very wide range of individual assets in that pool in terms
of their size. And some could be $10 million and some could be $149 million.
 
Dean Mark Wilkinson
CIBC Capital Markets, Research Division - Director of Institutional Equity Research
Okay. Fair enough. And are all of those free and clear of debt? Or do you have some favorable debt that you could be sort of offering up in
that sale process?
 
Neil William Edward Downey
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - Executive VP of Enterprise Strategies & CFO
There are a very limited number that have property-specific financing or stated ultimately, they're substantially free and clear.
 
Adam E. Paul
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - President, CEO & Trustee
So we have options Dean on that. In some cases, where it's a relationship lender, we can port the loan. In others, like the case of King
High Line, the debt went with the purchase. And obviously, that's a factor in the valuation. In the case of King High Line, the
mark-to-market was like inconsequential. And then as you probably know, we have interest rate hedges on that loan, which we retain
those, we didn't sell those. So it will depend. But if the debt goes with the property, we obviously value the debt and factor that into our
decision-making in the context of looking for premium pricing for assets we're selling.
 
Dean Mark Wilkinson
CIBC Capital Markets, Research Division - Director of Institutional Equity Research
Got it. Makes sense. And then maybe last one for Jordie. Of the $254 million sort of cost to complete, how much of that would be at risk
versus what you've got locked in on fixed-price contracts? And maybe a secondary question, can you even get a fixed-price contract today
when you're looking at something? Or has inflation just gone out of control?
 
Jordan Robins
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - Executive VP & COO
I'm going to have to get back to you on the first part of the question because I don't know it offhand. In terms of the second part, it's a
very good question. I would say it is certainly more difficult today to lock in fixed price contracts. We were lucky or I would say, smart at
the time to do it and take advantage of those contracts at the time. At the same time, we do business with a lot of these contractors, and
so have a very deep relationship with them. And I think that has proven and will prove to be helpful going forward as well.
 
Adam E. Paul
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - President, CEO & Trustee
Okay. Great. I guess to Neil's point, the best fixed price contract you've got right now is $15.83 a unit.
 
Operator
There are no further questions registered at this time. I'd like to turn the meeting back over to Adam.
 
Adam E. Paul
First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust - President, CEO & Trustee
Okay. Well, thank you very much, and thank you very much, everyone, for attending our third quarter earnings conference call. We hope
you have a wonderful afternoon. Bye-bye.
 
Operator
Thank you. The conference has now ended. Please disconnect your lines at this time, and we thank you for your participation.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.