CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
Dean A. Shigenaga
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - President & CFO
 
Hallie Kuhn
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
 
Peter M. Moglia
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - CEO & Co-CIO
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
Anthony Paolone
JPMorgan Chase & Co, Research Division - Senior Analyst
 
David Bryan Rodgers
Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division - Senior Research Analyst
 
Georgi Damyanov Dinkov
Mizuho Securities USA LLC, Research Division - Associate
 
Joshua Dennerlein
 
Michael Albert Carroll
RBC Capital Markets, Research Division - Analyst
 
Michael Anderson Griffin
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - Senior Associate
 
Nicholas Gregory Joseph
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - Director & Senior Analyst
 
Richard Charles Anderson
SMBC Nikko Securities America, Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
 
Stephen Thomas Sakwa
Evercore ISI Institutional Equities, Research Division - Senior MD & Senior Equity Research Analyst
 
William Thomas Catherwood
BTIG, LLC, Research Division - Director & REIT Analyst
 
Paula Schwartz
Rx Communications Group LLC - MD
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Good day, and welcome to the Alexandria Real Estate Equities Third Quarter 2022 Conference Call. (Operator Instructions)
Please note this event is being recorded. I would now like to turn the conference over to Paula Schwartz with Investor Relations. Please
go ahead.
 
Paula Schwartz
Rx Communications Group LLC - MD
Thank you, and good afternoon, everyone. This conference call contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal
securities laws. The company's actual results might differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements. Additional
information concerning factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements is
contained in the company's periodic reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. I'd now like to turn the call over to Joel
Marcus, Executive Chairman and Founder. Please go ahead, Joel.
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
Thank you, Paula, and welcome, everybody, to the Alexandria's third quarter earnings call. With me today are Peter Moglia, Dean
Shigenaga and Hallie Kuhn. First of all, thank you to our Alexandria family team for their continued exceptionalism in the face of a
challenging macro environment, mostly self-inflicted by a really deleterious set of government actions and policies, coupled with the
Fed, which has been slow to act. I think we -- I would characterize third quarter is really an exceptional quarter when you look at earnings
in this challenging macro environment, delivering 9.2% and 8.3% FFO per share growth for the third quarter and then 2022 year-to-date
is really exceptional especially, again, given the size and scope of the company with almost 75 million square feet in its total asset base.
I'd say the health and resilience of the broad and diverse life science sector, the niche, which we pioneered remains strong, and there is a
continuing strong R&D investment, Hallie will speak to this. But in general, we've seen life science R&D funding in 2021, approaching
almost $500 billion. I think the number is actually about $480 billion, which is astounding and $1.8 trillion since 2017, and we expect
totals in 2022 to be very strong continuation of that. I think it's also important to recognize that the strong life science sector
employment trends remain positive, and the core strength of the life science industry and our key cluster markets remains resilient and
continuing strong.
And I think the overwriting macro observation would be the long-term health care needs of this country certainly aren't going away.
Innovation in medicine is really a national imperative and just look at the mental health problem across this country as one simple
example. And as I've said many times before, there are about 10,000 known diseases to human kind. And really that we've only
addressed as a society about 10% with addressable therapies and very few real cures. Biotech, I think, remains resilient. Clinical data,
regulatory updates and M&A can be idiosyncratic events that really are unaffected by economic trends, and Hallie will talk about that. I
think demand continues very solidly for our high-quality and well-located assets, which are really powered by asset level operational
excellence, second to none. Alexandria has the greatest knowledge, and I think this is a pretty unique experience and expertise by orders
of magnitude with respect to life science real estate niche, which we created and informed by our over 1,000 client tenants were 87%, an
important number to remember of our leasing comes from.
We have a level of knowledge and understanding of the true life science real estate demand that just isn't out there if you hang for lease
sign and hire a broker. Alexandria continues to experience strong leasing spreads and rental rate increases. And I think we're very proud
that we've got 99.9% collections this quarter, truly stellar. Our industry-leading roster of the 1,000 tenants create drives and create
stable long-term duration cash flows and our high-quality and diverse industry mix is really unmatched. And I think one of the great
stories of the day I'll talk about in a moment will be the balance sheet. But among industry-leading fundamental metrics for the third
quarter which are notable and Dean will talk about some of the details there are a 10.6% same-store NOI growth increasing over the last
few years and the significant strategic value creation harvesting of over $2 billion, which Peter will detail. And I think something we're
very proud of having lived through the '08, '09, really financial crisis. And with this team steering the ship as an unrated REIT in those
days, today, we have matured and really have a fabulous fortress balance sheet. We've worked very hard to put together over many years.
I think it's important to note Alexandria out of 127 REITs as of June 30, has the second best debt maturity profile of all of them, and that's
pretty amazing.
Dean will highlight our liquidity of over $6 billion. And I think we were both, I think, strategically informed, and I think executionally,
aware when we timely executed both equity and debt transactions in both January and February of 2022 earlier this year before the
Ukraine invasion. And again, almost coming to the end of my comments, the strong and flexible balance sheet in addition to, I think,
fabulous liquidity, our remaining debt term is over 13 years. Our average weighted average interest rate is about 3.5%. And we've got
almost 96% of our debt, which is fixed rate. And again, no debt maturities into 2025. And I think as many of you know and we're working
on, we are crafting a well-thought-through set of alternative plans for 2023, which we'll unveil at Investor Day. And as you look out at the
world today and you just look at what happened at the PRC meeting this past week, where the President actually had his former person
who turned over the reins of power to him kind of ushered out a little bit in front of the entire party Congress there. It creates the
impression that we might not only have a ground war in Europe, but we might have a friction over Taiwan in a kinetic sense. And so that's
something to think about. And so we're planning hard about all eventual outcomes that could be very significant black swan events to
the United States of America.
So with that, let me turn it over to Hallie.
 
Hallie Kuhn
Thanks, Joel, and good afternoon, everyone. This is Hallie Kuhn, SVP of Science and Technology and Capital Markets. As Joel mentioned,
today, I'm going to provide an update on the life science fundamentals driving the long-term growth of the industry, tenant health and
how Alexandria proactively work with the vanguard of this highly dynamic industry in a challenging macro environment to continue to
grow our one-of-a-kind and truly world-class company. First and foremost, while we are in a cyclical downturn, innovative medicines take
on average over 10 years to develop, meaning that the life science industry is not cyclical, but is largely event and product driven. And the
life science industry is still in its early innings and poised for growth. As the recent expansion of complex modalities such as cell, gene
and RNA-based therapies reflect, the pursuit for new and better medicines is truly the growth industry of this century, and there still
remains immense challenges to solve. Every day in the U.S., an approximate 1,670 people will pass away from cancer. Every 4 minutes
today, an individual will die from a stroke. And every 37 seconds, someone will pass away from heart disease. Not to mention the 90% of
known diseases that have no available treatment. While the macro market conditions are not to be taken lightly, the life science industry
is on a steep long-term growth trajectory. So where do the fundamentals stand to drive and sustain this long-term growth? I'll start by
walking through the multiple sources of life science funding. Notably, through the third quarter of 2022, venture capital funds have
raised an all-time high of $149 billion, eclipsing 2021 historic year with $144 billion raised.
Given the average funds investment period is 4 to 5 years, this significant amount of dry powder will continue to translate into
well-funded private biotech companies for years to come. Companies with the most innovative technologies and experienced founders
and management teams continue to successfully raise capital and we continue to see healthy demand across this segment. Moving on to
the equity market. While the IPO window largely remains closed, the market is responding positively to meaningful data readouts. As an
example, 2 tenants in our San Francisco Bay Area region recently announced positive Phase I and Phase I/II clinical data, sending shares
up 60% and 70%, respectively. And just as a reminder, within the public biotech tenant category, the majority of our ARR comes from
tenants with marketed products, including many large-cap tenants with strong balance sheets such as Vertex and Moderna.
Next, large pharma continues to outperform the broader markets with significant cash on hand to put towards internal growth and
external M&A and partnerships, which is critical for biopharma as it looks to backfill their pipeline with innovative new products.
Biopharma R&D spend totaled $262 billion in 2021, with the top 20 biopharma putting on average over 20% of revenues back into R&D.
Notably, at the end of the third quarter, 17 out of the top 20 biopharma were Alexandria tenants. A stat that as of today has increased to
18 of the top 20 biopharma. While M&A has largely focused on bolt-on acquisitions, partnerships continue to be an important source of
nondilutive funding for private and small to mid biocaps companies.
With respect to government funding, the NIH budget continues to increase year-over-year with broad bipartisan support. The proposed
2023 budget is $49 billion, a 9% increase over 2022. This base total does not include an additional $12.1 billion proposed for pandemic
preparedness and an additional $1.3 billion for program evaluation, which would bring the total NIH budget for 2023 to $62.5 billion.
With respect to notable clinical and regulatory developments, this quarter saw critical late-stage clinical readouts and an accelerated
approval for indications in schizophrenia, Alzheimer's and ALS, all of which are devastating diseases with limited treatment options.
Tenant BioNTech also published promising early clinical data, demonstrating their novel mRNA therapies can train the body's immune
system to identify and kill cancer cells. A testament to the opportunity of mRNA technology beyond COVID vaccines.
On the regulatory front, the FDA continues to approve new therapies at a sustained pace, including 28 new drug approvals from the
FDA's drug division CDER this year. The FDA's biologic division CBER approved 2 gene therapies just this quarter, increasing the total
U.S. gene therapy approvals from 2 to 4, and there are an astounding 500 cell and gene therapies in clinical development. The
fundamentals remain strong, and it's the backdrop of a volatile and uncertain economic conditions. Switching to tenant health, as our
99.9% 3Q collections and historic 10-year occupancy of 96% at test, our asset base is in a great position. As you can see on Page 17 of our
sup, our life science tenant roster is diverse, spanning multinational pharma; life science product, service and devices; public and private
biotech and institutions and benchmarking ARE to just one of the segments does not capture the strength and depth of our asset base.
Critically, maintaining the health of our over 1,000 industry-leading tenant roster is not a static process, but a highly proactive effort that
incorporates our deep understanding of the life science fundamentals, intimate knowledge of our tenants work, pre-existing
relationships and a dedicated and passionate team focused on best-in-class operational excellence.
Our job is to engineer outcomes. This work comes in many shapes and sizes, whether it's creatively utilizing our over 40 million square
feet operating asset base to provide critical space to a company ahead of a future delivery, or swapping a good but perhaps stagnant
tenant with a fast-growing tenant and taking advantage of the nearly 30% mark-to-market rental increases across our asset base, all
with the goal of continued optimization of leases to innovative high-credit tenants. I'll leave you with a quote from David Ricks, CEO of Eli
Lilly, who we have the pleasure of hosting for not 1, but indeed 2 ribbon cutting, celebrating new Eli Lilly spaces at Alexandria properties
just last week. In regards to the life science industry, he said, the gains for winners are bigger than ever. Being nimble, fast and attuned
to the outside world and having the right people, all these basics matter more than ever. Indeed, this is a sentiment that applies broadly
beyond the life science industry and is one we hold deeply at Alexandria. With that, I'll pass it off to Peter.
 
Peter M. Moglia
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - CEO & Co-CIO
Thank you, Hallie. I'd like to start by thanking all the teams of the company for your never-ending dedication, high-quality work product
and collaborative spirit that made Steve's transition to retirement seamless as we all expected it would be. Steve continues to be actively
involved in certain projects, and we consider him an invaluable resource to the executive management team. Since Steve is no longer on
the calls, I'll cover leasing as well as updating you on other key topics of the day, such as the development pipeline, construction costs
and the harvesting of our value creation.
As we sit here today, Alexandria has an equity market cap and credit rating in the top 10% among all publicly traded U.S. equity REITs, a
North American asset base of 74.5 million square feet, 431 properties in operation development or redevelopment and over 1,000
innovative tenants to inform our investment and operating strategies. We should note that it has taken over 28 years to reach these
milestones. One cannot create such a dominant position in an industry overnight, and it takes far more than great real estate to do it. Our
vast network, operational excellence and technical know-how are just a few of the many reasons we are one of a kind company in a class
by ourselves. The life science industry has grown significantly in recent years, with the success of new modalities such as mRNA and cell
therapy, and we have grown along with it by capturing the majority of investment opportunities that have come about from those
inventions and others.
With the onset of market volatility, we are seeing a normalization of demand. And although in the near term, we don't anticipate seeing
the same level of activity we saw in a record-breaking year of 2021. We continue to see healthy demand manifesting into solid leasing
numbers. With respect to the leasing of our value creation pipeline, which is expected to add approximately $645 million in incremental
annual rental revenue from 4Q '22 through the third quarter of 2025, we leased approximately 330,000 square feet in the third quarter.
Although that total is approximately 1/3 of the record-breaking 2021 quarterly average, it is 18% higher than the previous 5-year average,
indicating we have returned to a normal run rate of leasing. With that leasing, our 7.6 million square feet of projects under construction
and pre-leased near-term projects leased -- reached 78% leased, up 4% over last quarter. During the quarter, we delivered
approximately 330,000 square feet at a weighted average yield of 7.1%, which will add approximately $30 million in annualized NOI to
our P&L.
Transitioning to overall leasing. The third quarter results continue to demonstrate Alexandria's ability to outperform even in turbulent
times due to our significant differentiation among all who seek to participate in life science real estate, which can be summarized with 4
unassailable attributes. Irreplaceable AAA locations adjacent or in close proximity to the country's best life science research institutions.
Operational excellence in the running of our tenants' mission-critical facilities; mega campuses providing highly valued optionality,
scalability and amenities; and a curated roster of over 1,000 tenants, including the most impactful and creditworthy research companies
and entities in the world, providing unmatched industry insight.
Despite current macroeconomic conditions, demand for Alexandria's best-in-class facilities continues to be at pre-2021 normal run rate.
Examples of this include: in the third quarter, leasing volume was 1,662,069 rentable square feet which is above our 10-year quarterly
average of 1.3 million square feet and well above our pre-2021 5-year average of 1.1 million square feet. Year-to-date leasing volume of
6.4 million square feet is above our 5-year average of 6 million square feet, and we still have the fourth quarter to add to these totals. In
the third quarter, cash and GAAP increases continued to be very healthy, with 22.6% cash increase and a 27.1% GAAP increase. And our
operating asset mark-to-mark continues to be healthy at approximately 30%. In our quarterly examination of construction costs, the
theme that jumps out at us is that overall cost and supply chain issues are starting to ease, but contractors don't trust what may happen
tomorrow. The disruption brought about by COVID in 2020 was exacerbated by the stimulus implemented to mitigate it, and as we all
know, has led to inflation not seen since Jimmy Carter's presidency. This inflation caused serious losses to the construction industry as
contractors were legally bound to deliver projects within lump sum or gross maximum budgets that had become grossly underfunded
with every passing month as the economy opened and pent-up demand for construction materials and labor through the system
violently out of equilibrium.
These losses have caused contractors to keep pricing high despite anticipated reductions in cost. Therefore, we need to remain cautious
about projecting any easing of conditions until the construction market can be confident, another shoe is not going to drop, and that time
has not come yet. It's easy to understand this mindset because evidence of an easing is only anecdotal at this point. Steel, copper, lumber
and labor costs had shown signs of leveling off, but escalations from the third quarter of '21 to the third quarter of '22 totaled 12.3%, well
above normal. And lumber just spiked again 2 weeks ago. That said, supply has started to catch up with demand. Inventories and
materials are still low, but improving. Freight transportation is trending down. Contractor backlogs though strong through '23, are
finding openings due to canceled projects and fewer new projects are starting. This opening up of capacity has slowly returned the ability
for general contractors to get 3 bids from some subs. Grassroots to normalization, you could call it. But there are storm clouds on the
horizon in the form of billions of dollars of work anticipated to build mega chip factories and the $1.2 trillion Infrastructure Investment
and Jobs Act signed into law last November, which could roll back any easing of construction of supply chain conditions.
Overall, we do expect construction costs to begin reverting to the mean due to the easing of contractor backlogs and relatively better
availability of materials, but Alexandria will continue to conservatively underwrite construction cost escalations in our pro formas. We
have a deep and experienced team that works in lockstep with our underwriters to ensure we are accounting for the latest trends in our
current and future projects. Interest rates continue to wreak havoc on investment markets, and we feel fortunate that our scarce product
type continues to be in demand during such a turbulent time. Evidence of this can be seen on Page 5 of the supplemental, where we
present the results of certain asset dispositions, which have raised $2.2 billion in capital to date, including $1.26 billion in the third
quarter. Included in those dispositions was the completion of the previously announced partial interest land sale at 1450 Owens in
Mission Bay to a development JV partner for a land value of $324 per buildable foot.
The sale of a portfolio of assets spanning the submarkets of South San Francisco and Greater Stanford for a 5.2% cash cap rate. A
one-off asset along the I-15 corridor for a 5.3% cap rate. 2 assets on Carroll Road in Sorrento Mesa, for a 4.6% cap rate, a partial interest
sale of a campus in Sorrento Mesa, for a 4.6% cap rate and the partial interest sale of a high-quality asset in Merryfield Row in Torrey
Pines for a 4.1% cap rate. The low 5 cap rates achieved in the San Francisco portfolio and the I-15 sale in San Diego are indicative of the
age of the assets. Still attractive workhorse assets, they do not reflect the higher end profile of our core. The strong sub-5 cap rates for
the partial interest sale of the Summers Ridge campus and the Carroll Road assets are more representative of our asset base. The
Merryfield Row asset is purpose-built lab by Alexandria and like many of our other purpose-built assets is one of the best located and
most attractive asset in submarket. In this case, Torrey Pines. The 4.1% cap rate was influenced by the growth in rents in Torrey Pines
since the lease was signed, but the lease is almost 12 years of term remaining before the upside can be realized. So it's quality and
location really drove the value.
I'd also like to note that the scarcity value we talk about being a driver for keeping our cap rates lower relative to other product types can
be seen in transactions by others. Just last month, Biogen completed a sale leaseback in Cambridge for $2,185 price per square foot
value and the [Carlyle Group] sold a 77,000 square foot Blackstone Science Square building in Mid-Cambridge for a 4.1% cap rate at a
price just short of $2,000 per square foot. As the Fed continues to pull levers to battle inflation, we expect we will see cap rates move up,
but much less on a relative basis to other product types and thus, we remain well positioned to fund our value creation pipeline efficiently
and at a relatively attractive pricing by harvesting our value creation among their sources.
With that, I'll pass the call over to Dean.
 
Dean A. Shigenaga
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - President & CFO
Thanks, Peter. Dean here. Good afternoon, everyone. Our team delivered on truly remarkable results for both the 3 and 9 months ended
September 30. Total revenues were up 20.5% and 24.8% for the 3 and 9 months of 2022 in comparison to 2021. FFO per share diluted
as adjusted for the 3 ending months was $2.13 and $6.28, up 9.2%, 8.3% over 2021 and importantly, beat consensus. The strong
financial and operating results reflects the strength of our brand, our scale, high-quality and well-located properties and operational
excellence, serving the mission-critical needs of some of the most innovative entities in the world. Congratulations to our entire team for
truly outstanding executions over many quarters. This really stands out within the REIT industry, especially during this very challenging
macro environment. Our strong balance sheet and liquidity management highlights truly awesome execution by our team over many
years. Our team is very pleased to have earned our corporate credit ratings that rank in the top 10% of the REIT industry. We are also very
pleased to have further improved the strength of our balance sheet in the third quarter with a significant increase in liquidity.
We completed an amendment to our line of credit, increasing aggregate commitments to $4 billion, up $1 billion over the prior credit
facility. A huge thank you to our important lending relationships for providing significant liquidity for our company. Our total liquidity as
of September 30 is now very significant at $6.4 billion. We are one of the very few REITs with no debt maturities until 2025. 96% of our
outstanding debt represents long-term fixed rate debt and the percentage of fixed rate debt is expected to be even higher by the end of
the year. Net debt to adjusted EBITDA is on track to hit our 5.1x target by year-end. Our total outstanding debt has a weighted average
rate of 3.52% and a weighted average maturity of 13.2 years. The execution of our capital plan this year was exceptional given the macro
environment. We did $1.8 billion of 12- and 30-year bonds with a weighted average rate of 3.28% in a term of 22 years, which was
completed in February. Most of our common equity for 2022 was completed in the first quarter and entirely completed by June 30. And
then we turn to continued execution of our strategic value harvesting through outright sales and partial interest sales of real estate.
Through September 30, we've completed $2.2 billion in sales, including $1 billion in the third quarter with gains or consideration in
excess of book value of $1.2 billion, which is really significant value creation.
Now our focus on real estate dispositions for 2022 leaves us with an advantage at year-end with about $250 million of cash that will
reduce our debt needs for 2023. As we look forward, we will remain disciplined and careful with our allocation of capital. Briefly on
dividends. Our Board has been consistent over the past decade with growth in common stock dividends year-to-year, supported by
strong growth in cash flows and our low FFO payout ratio, which is generally in the range of 55% to 60%. Cash flows from operating
activities after dividends are projected at the midpoint to be about $300 million for 2022, and to put this into perspective, over an
approximate 3-year period, this represents approximately $1 billion for reinvestment.
Now ARE pioneered our favorable lease structure with contractual annual escalations approximately 3%, triple net leases that provide
for the recovery of operating expenses and the recovery of major capital expenditures. Now our team also curated a tenant roster of
high-quality tenants, including 49% of our annual rental revenue from investment-grade and large-cap publicly traded entities.
Occupancy is up 30 basis points since the beginning of the year and is expected to continue to increase by year-end, highlighting the
strength of our brand and trusted partnership with our tenants. EBITDA margins, 69%, really reflects the operational excellence and
operating efficiency of our business, and this also represents an industry-leading statistic. Leasing was very solid in the third quarter at
1.7 million rentable square feet with rental rate growth on lease renewals and re-leasing a space of 27.1% and 22.6% on a cash basis. TIs
and leasing commissions on lease renewals and re-leasing the space for the 9 months were down about 20% in comparison to the full
year of 2021. And the third quarter included 2 long-term lease extensions of roughly 10 years with a 47% increase in net effective rent.
Now excluding these 2 long-term lease extensions with somewhat elevated TIs and leasing commissions in the third quarter, TIs and
leasing commissions would have been relatively minor at approximately $25 per square foot. Same-property NOI growth has been very
strong for the 9 months ended September 30 at 7% and 8.9% on a cash basis. And to put this into perspective, our 10-year average
same-property NOI growth was 3.6% and 6.6% on a cash basis.
The outperformance in 2022 relative to this 10-year average was driven primarily by 110 basis point year-to-date growth in occupancy
with about a 2x benefit to net operating income. And then really outsized benefit from significant early lease renewals that commenced
very early in 2022, providing for a full year benefit this year. Now we continue to make excellent progress on leasing. Contractual lease
expirations for 2023 represents only 6.6% of annual rental revenue down from 9% as of the second quarter. Now importantly, 2023
contractual lease expirations representing only 70% or 4.6% of our annual rental revenue remains in the category of too early to tell,
meaning not already leased, not under negotiation or not targeted for redevelopment. Turning to venture investments. These
investments have generated consistent gains averaging about $25.4 million, which is included in FFO as adjusted over the last 8
quarters. This is very solid and very consistent. Now it's important to highlight that on average over the last 6 years, only -- about only
30% of the realized gains included in FFO were generated from our investments in publicly traded securities, 70% were generated from
investments in privately held entities.
Gross unrealized gains as of September 30 were $529 million, including $102 million and $427 million from publicly traded and privately
held entities, respectively. Lastly, on guidance. We updated our guidance for 2022 and narrowed the range for EPS and FFO per share
from a range of $0.06 to a range of $0.02 per share. Our '22 guidance for EPS diluted is a range of $5.70 to $5.72 and FFO per share as
adjusted diluted is a range from $8.40 to $8.42 with no change in the midpoint of $8.41. As a reminder, we are about 4 weeks away from
the issuance of our detailed guidance for 2023. And therefore, we are unable to comment on details for 2023.
With that, let me turn it back to Joel.
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
Thanks, Dean. And if we could go to questions, please?
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) Our first question comes from Michael Griffin from Citi Group.
 
Michael Anderson Griffin
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - Senior Associate
Peter, it seemed like you talked pretty favorably about the properties, the attractive cap rate, particularly at the (inaudible) asset in San
Diego. I'm curious if these properties are so attractive, why did it make sense to dispose of these?
 
Peter M. Moglia
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - CEO & Co-CIO
Just we have a number of properties on the docket to do the same thing, too. We're recycling capital, putting it back into great projects
we have in our value creation pipeline. So it was efficient capital to harvest and reinvest.
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
Well, and I think one of the other things is we have some fabulously large opportunities up on the Mesa and Torrey Pines, 2 very
large-scale development sites that we're working on. And so we have no shortage of Class A opportunities in the best submarket in San
Diego.
 
Nicholas Gregory Joseph
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - Director & Senior Analyst
This is Nick Joseph here with Michael. You touched on the macro concerns and Black Swan events and disruption in the construction
market. So when you blend that all together, how do you think about the impact on development plans at least in the near term?
 
Unidentified Company Representative
Joel, are you taking that?
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
Could you repeat the question?
 
Nicholas Gregory Joseph
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - Director & Senior Analyst
Yes. It's on development starts. And I think in your prepared remarks, you kind of laid out some of the macro concerns, you talked about
China, you talked about potential for black swan events. And then later, you talked about disruption in the construction market and
maybe not seeing pricing come back yet. And so I'm wondering how that plays into your expectations on near-term development starts.
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
Yes. I think we'll -- if you'll hold your question to Investor Day, I think we'll be able to give you a very good view of that. And I think we
have an interesting set of alternative plans given what may unfold in '23, given how we think about Plan A, Plan B and Plan C that might
unfold out in the general economy. But I think it's fair to say and Dean can comment where we have very strong leasing opportunities,
we'll clearly look for ways to accelerate those opportunities and fund them carefully with the best sources of capital. But Dean, I don't
know if you want to comment any further. I think we wait until Investor Day to give you up eyeballs view of that.
 
Dean A. Shigenaga
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - President & CFO
Yes, I think what I would just add to Joel's comments is that we sit in a pretty unique position. We have the benefit of some of the best
located land parcels for life science use in these core cluster markets and really positioned from the standpoint of optionality is the best
way of thinking about it. Meaning, we have the tenant roster that, as Joel mentioned, 87% of our leasing activity comes from. We have
the land sites. So we really have the option to meet the demand. So we have that flexibility. And so I think that's the best way of thinking
about our pipeline. It gives us options. We don't have to address it, but it gives us plenty of options.
 
Nicholas Gregory Joseph
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - Director & Senior Analyst
Maybe just a follow up on that, just with the impairment charge in the quarter. Can you walk through that project and kind of the decision
to walk away from it?
 
Dean A. Shigenaga
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - President & CFO
Sure. It's Dean here. So -- as you know, the disclosures we had about a little bit more than $38 million in impairment charges. It was
primarily related to one project that which we no longer chose to proceed forward with. It was a development project, about 600,000
rentable square feet. The parcel was located in California. We did not own the land. We had pretty significant cost incurred, but it was
really our investment to date, which was significantly related to the entitlement work for the site. And the reason for not moving forward
with the project was very specific to the financial outlook for the project. There was no release negotiation related to the project to be
clear. And beyond that, I guess, we're not in a position to comment much further on the project. But as you've heard from us on this call
and over the last several quarters, it's really important to keep in perspective that we did lease about 2.7 million rentable square feet of
development and redevelopment space just in the first 3 quarters of 2022. So it's very specific to the project.
 
Operator
The next question comes from Anthony Paolone from JPMorgan.
 
Anthony Paolone
JPMorgan Chase & Co, Research Division - Senior Analyst
Your 7 near-term development projects that you plan to start, are those yields locked up? Or is there any room for movement there if the
environment changes here given what's happened to rates or where do those stand?
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
Yes. So Dean, do you want to comment on that?
 
Dean A. Shigenaga
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - President & CFO
Yes. By and large, they're getting close to being locked up in the sense of -- as you go through a lease negotiation and execute a lease,
both sides of the relationship landlord and tenant will work through a fairly detailed budget. Once the lease is executed, the tenant
moves forward to their side to refine their cost estimates as they get into really the details. So big picture, we have a sense of the yields.
The exact yields will be refined as the tenant finalizes the extreme details of their build-out. And then on the cost side, as you've heard
from us for many quarters now, we do build in contingencies to protect us from construction cost escalations. And as we usually do, we'll
make disclosures of those yields as soon as we can. And generally, that time line is consistent with once the tenant finalizes the details of
their project design. So it usually lags disclosures of lease-up. But I think the important thing to recognize is we had no changes in cost at
completion for any of our projects on an unfavorable -- from an unfavorable perspective nor on yields. We did have one project that had
an increase in cost at completion, but it corresponded with a pretty significant increase in revenue as well. So we're generating for solid
return on the incremental capital. So our team has done a tremendous job managing costs in a very unusual environment when you have
to consider supply chain considerations and just continued escalations in construction costs.
 
Anthony Paolone
JPMorgan Chase & Co, Research Division - Senior Analyst
Okay. I mean should we think about just expected development yields to go higher given just incrementally higher funding costs? Or I
guess, to Peter's point, maybe they don't go up quite as much as rates. Just trying to think about where that could go as we start to think
about the next round of starts.
 
Dean A. Shigenaga
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - President & CFO
I think it's tough, Tony, to speculate about yields on a specific project because every project is very unique. The location, the nature of the
build, the complexity of the build and specifically the back-and-forth negotiation with our relationship tenants. I would say, generally
speaking, we'll do the best we can to push yields in the right direction upwards by managing our construction costs carefully looking for
opportunities to become more efficient, but that's not a simple task as we all know, you can't just cut cost. You have to do that very
carefully. And hopefully, the rental rate environment continues to support upward movement in that direction, which would translate
hopefully into ongoing upward direction in returns or yields. But Tony, just I don't want to speculate specifically. Every deal is very unique,
and we'll take those decisions incrementally when they do come up.
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
Yes. I mean, Tony, the one thing to think about what Dean just discussed about yields, how that bears on our decision-making is useful to
think about our decision not to go forward with that specific project. So that clearly is -- weighs on our decision to go or not to go in every
single case.
 
Anthony Paolone
JPMorgan Chase & Co, Research Division - Senior Analyst
Got it. If I could just ask one just clarifying question on the accounting. The -- your gains and losses that are realized on the investment
book that go through FFO, is that based on the most recent mark against what you realized or your original cost?
 
Dean A. Shigenaga
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - President & CFO
Generally, it's the original cost, Tony, unless for some reason, over the years, we've taken a write-down, which is a realized loss, i.e., in
impairment. But traditionally, it's against the -- more often than not, it's against our original cost basis, Tony. And I would also just point
out that the key drivers between or around realized gains in our venture portfolio is really driven by liquidity events. So they're natural
events. Occasionally, on the public side, which is only about 30% of our gains historically over the last 6 years. I mean we ultimately sell a
handful of public securities. And that's what ultimately drives some of the gains on the public side, but it's a small piece of the overall
mix on average.
 
Operator
The next question comes from Steve Sakwa from Evercore ISI.
 
Stephen Thomas Sakwa
Evercore ISI Institutional Equities, Research Division - Senior MD & Senior Equity Research Analyst
I was just wondering, Peter, if you could talk a little bit more about the demand trends that you're seeing, maybe by the type of tenant by
broad industry and maybe by your key clusters and are you seeing better demand on the West Coast up to Boston, New York, any color
on regional demand would be helpful.
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
Yes. So this is Joel. Steve, and welcome back. I think we'd like not to answer that question at a granular level. I think it -- it's pretty
proprietary. And as we said, 87% of our leases this quarter, for example, came from our tenant base. And I think it would not be useful for
us to go into granular detail on that. But I can tell you and Peter can comment broadly, demand is solid in all of our markets at the
moment.
 
Peter M. Moglia
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - CEO & Co-CIO
Yes. I'd agree with that. And as it consistent with my comments, I would say it's at a normalized rate that corresponds to the last few
years, if you take out 2021, which was an outlier, but it's broad. It's still -- we've been talking about it for a while, how all of our clusters
have been doing well, that continues to be the case. So...
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
Yes. And I would add to gloss on that, Steve. Think about what both Hallie and I said. This is not a -- these are episodic industry, so to
speak, not really driven macroeconomically. And so demand often is generated by clinical data readouts, regulatory readouts and
updates and sometimes M&A where somebody buys a company and then wants to expand. We've seen that. We've seen it on the other
hand where they may buy a company and roll it up. But oftentimes, companies are bought for their talent unless you've got a kind of just
a product opportunity. So I think that's how you have to think about it.
 
Stephen Thomas Sakwa
Evercore ISI Institutional Equities, Research Division - Senior MD & Senior Equity Research Analyst
Great. And then second question, maybe just on the dispose, Peter, I know you provided a fair amount of detail on the cap rates. I'm just
curious the depth of the buyer pool and maybe how it's changed? And do you have a sense for kind of where unlevered IRR expectations
are for buyers of the various products that you transacted on in the last quarter?
 
Peter M. Moglia
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - CEO & Co-CIO
We've had a consistent buyer pool and all of our activities over the last few years. We generally try to keep it limited. We don't want to
disperse too much information to a broad audience. And those players have continued to show up for our deals and it has resulted in the
cap rates. So on an unlevered IRR basis, yes, I'm sure that it's higher than it was. I know in the peak times, people were underwriting to a
5 or less. I can't tell you what they're doing today, but obviously, it's gone up. But with our product type, the rental growth, you can pay a
4-something cap rate; and with the annual increases in our leases and with market rent growth, you can exceed 6%, 7% pretty easily on
an unlevered basis these days.
 
Operator
The next question comes from Rich Anderson from SMBC.
 
Richard Charles Anderson
SMBC Nikko Securities America, Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
One of the things that sort of emerge from periods of dislocation like seen in the REITs in the past as well as in biotech is increased M&A
activity and its aftermath. We certainly saw some of that in the REIT space post pandemic. I'm wondering if you have a similar
expectation in biotech. I know there's been some sort of fringe type of activity. But is there an opportunity to see more in the way of M&A
as a sort of an indicator of emerging health from that space? And if so, do you see it as a benefit to you in terms of future leasing and so
on?
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
Yes. So maybe I'll comment generally and ask Hallie to also comment. I think, Rich, I don't think we're going to see any blockbuster M&A
deals, big company to big company or even a big company to moderate sized companies that impact what is perceived to be some
competitive situation in a therapeutic class, the FTC, I think under this administration has been fairly hostile to almost every client in
every industry get together because they claim it's always not competitive or it diminishes competition somehow increase prices. So I
think that's -- I mean, we've seen this play out a little bit with Illumina and GRAIL, and GRAIL was spun out of Illumina. So none of that
makes particular sense. But I think it's fair to say we will see, and I think Hallie mentioned this and continue to see. We just saw recently,
Lilly just bought a bolt-on acquisition of a hearing loss company, I think you're going to continue to see a range of bolt-on acquisitions for
product opportunities. And I think sometimes it's going to be a positive, sometimes it may not be. But overall, historically, if we look back
at our 25 years as a public company, it's been generally pretty positive for us. But Hallie, any other thoughts you have?
 
Hallie Kuhn
Yes. I agree with everything you mentioned, Joel. And maybe just to say that depending on the company and the outcome, it's positive for
the ecosystem, whether or not there's a real estate outcome, thinking about some of the bolt-on acquisitions where it really is product
driven. We see those executives go off to start new companies. We have deep existing relationships with them. They often go on to
establish and grow their next large biotech. So in the long run, these events are positive for the ecosystem. There are a number of
examples where M&A over the years has led to really sizable footprint. BMS in San Diego is a great example of that over time with the
acquisition of Signal about 2 decades ago and then Celgene. And then as you saw in the first quarter this year, we announced their
420,000 square foot in new development with us in San Diego. So over time, the acquisitions definitely can lead to additional space
needs, but it's very dependent on the type of acquisition. And again, the overall net positive for the ecosystem is really great as investors
go to put their returns to work in terms of new companies and founders go off to start new endeavors as well.
 
Operator
The next call comes from -- next question comes from Georgi Dinkov from Mizuho.
 
Georgi Damyanov Dinkov
Mizuho Securities USA LLC, Research Division - Associate
I guess, you mentioned that...
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
It's hard to hear you. So could you maybe speak closer to the mic?
 
Georgi Damyanov Dinkov
Mizuho Securities USA LLC, Research Division - Associate
Yes. Can you hear me now?
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
Perfect.
 
Georgi Damyanov Dinkov
Mizuho Securities USA LLC, Research Division - Associate
Okay. Sorry about that. Yes. So you just mentioned that supply is catching up with demand. So my question is which markets have the
most supplier risk? And how do you think about competition from office conversion?
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
Well, that's a complicated question. I'm not sure we have the time or ability on this call to go in market by market, not sure we want to do
it. But I mean, I think if you look at New York as a great example. We've pioneered the first commercial life science center and campus in
New York City. There's millions and millions, tens of millions, hundreds of millions of square feet, and there are a number of projects that
are being worked on there. The demand has been fairly modest. It's early stage. And it's pretty clear that literally almost most buildings
in New York can't be converted from office to laboratory and probably wouldn't want to be given the market. So I think you have to look
at that on a submarket-by-submarket basis. I don't even think you could look at it as an overall market-by-market basis. And we know
from Boston, there have been a handful of conversions. We know, in particular, a recent case downtown, where somebody kind of
jury-rigged an office building, brought in some smaller tenants, and we know the smaller tenants have experience both for the developer
who's never done it before and the tenant massive cost overruns on that conversion. So -- but as I say, just look at, again, 87% of our
leases come from our existing tenants, we feel very good about our ability to continue to generate steady demand in these markets. And
we've been through the cycles. We are through the cycle in 2000, 2001, the big tech burst bubble, if you will, and '08 and '09 with a big
financial crisis. So we're fully prepared and I think our portfolio or asset base really is in great shape.
 
Georgi Damyanov Dinkov
Mizuho Securities USA LLC, Research Division - Associate
Okay. And given the rising recession concerns, how should we think about tenant credit risk or more large cap, mid-cap or small cap
biotech? And do you see any risk to occupancy in a downturn?
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
Yes. So we've been very protected. I don't know, Hallie, do you want to comment on that? Because you've had a number of conversations
about the health of the -- and the diversity of our tenant base and the credit quality.
 
Hallie Kuhn
Yes, absolutely. So I direct you to look at Page 17 of our supplemental, which has a breakdown by ARR of our business types across the
life science industry. And as we'd like to stress on other calls, small and mid-cap is a very small percentage of our overall tenant base.
And what we've done as well in the past 2 quarters has broken -- has broken down our public biotech segment by marketed products
versus preclinical and clinical products. And as you can see, the majority are marketed. And these are, as mentioned on the call, there's
companies like Vertex, Moderna folks with incredibly large balance sheets and cash to deploy. It's important to know that our team and
our diligence process is truly unique. We have a number of folks, including myself, with PHD backgrounds across the biotechnology
space that significantly underwrite these companies, understand what their risk profile is, what their opportunity and growth profile are
and then monitor them extensively as they progress. So all things put together, we have a really strong set of companies across all of our
different business types, which collectively reflect the strength of our asset base.
 
Peter M. Moglia
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - CEO & Co-CIO
Yes. And this is Peter. You should harken back to Hallie's comments in the beginning, where she talked about the fact that it takes, on
average, about 10 years to get something to the clinic. So demand for life science real estate is much more inelastic and can't necessarily
be varied due to current macroeconomic conditions. The companies need to continue to press on to get their revenue-producing project
to market. We look -- we did a look back to the great financial crisis a little while ago and noticed that the change in occupancy from the
start to the end was negligible. I think it was maybe a 40 basis point swing at the trough. So our business is extremely resilient and it
needs to be -- or just because of the industry's profile, it will continue to be, nothing's changed from that aspect.
 
Georgi Damyanov Dinkov
Mizuho Securities USA LLC, Research Division - Associate
Great. That's all for me.
 
Operator
The next question comes from Dave Rogers from Baird.
 
David Bryan Rodgers
Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division - Senior Research Analyst
Dean, I wanted to start with you. I realize that you guys are going to wait maybe until Investor Day to talk about funding for projects you
haven't started yet. I was just wondering maybe if, Dean, you could give us a little sense of kind of your plan with cash flow, cash on hand
and the recent sales to fund the stuff that you've already started that you still have to complete going forward.
 
Dean A. Shigenaga
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - President & CFO
Dave, it's Dean here. So I guess as you acknowledge, we're going to get into the details of our plan for 2023 in about 4 weeks at Investor
Day. Maybe some high-level thoughts on the capital plan that you're looking at on our active projects with a handful of projects that
we've committed in the near term that are leased. So we have about 7.6 million square feet. It's 78% leased and this pipeline can
generate $645 million of incremental net operating income, which is just spectacular. If you look at the most recent starts or the stuff
that's pending to start near term, just call it some projects could take up to 3 years to finish.
NOI will commence quarter-to-quarter, as you would expect, even starting next quarter on this pipeline. I highlighted earlier that if you
look out over about a 3-year period at our current run rate for cash flows from operating activities after dividends over 3 years, you've got
$1 billion to reinvest. Equity capital -- equity type capital for our pipeline includes this -- we probably are sitting on about $6.8 billion of
equity type capital and it's this $1 billion of cash flows that I just mentioned, we got about $1.5 billion outstanding for equity contracts.
And then obviously, our CIP related to just the $645 million of incremental NOI is all that stuff's broad equity type capital. Some of it's
incurred, some of it's future cash flows. But if you look at that, some number approaching almost $7 billion. At our typical leverage
profile, assuming 5.1 year-end target for net debt to adjusted EBITDA, this pipeline will generate probably $3.3 billion or something in
that range of debt funding. That's roughly 1/3 debt, 2/3 equity on a leverage-neutral basis. So as the EBITDA starts to come online, you
can fund quite a bit from a debt perspective as well. And so those are the numbers I would keep in mind, broadly, we obviously continue
to focus on real estate dispositions, given the strength of the private market values and the scarcity of our assets, as Peter has been
highlighting for a number of quarters.
Obviously, over the next 3 years, each of the years or every year is very different. And therefore, the funding needs for each year will vary.
Basically, there's different timing from commencement of NOI and construction spend in each of the years. But it's really important to
point out that there is a path forward if we had to navigate a period without access to the capital markets. So call it, if the capital markets
were shut for 3 years. And I think from a risk management perspective, our team analyzes this every quarter. And we do find comfort in
the results. Obviously, this is clearly not an operating scenario we would expect for 3 years, call it, one bookend scenario that you must
evaluate from a risk management perspective. So I don't want to get into specifics for '23, but hopefully, those broad strokes help you
understand that we're reasonably well positioned to address what could become a even more challenging environment. We look forward
to presenting the details of our outlook for 2023 at our Investor Day in late November.
 
David Bryan Rodgers
Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division - Senior Research Analyst
Really appreciate that. Dean, that was helpful. And just one follow-up for me. Maybe to Joel or to Peter, clearly, you're getting the rent
that you need on the development. So that's continuing to grow and keep pace remotely with -- it sounds like inflation. What are you
seeing on just market rent growth? You gave the mark-to-market earlier, but -- and obviously, your spreads continue to kind of grab
those -- that mark-to-market. But I'm curious on what you're seeing in market rents, maybe even a band. You don't have to go market by
market, but what you're seeing kind of across the country?
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
Yes. So Peter, I don't know if you want to comment. I think we're still seeing rent growth in almost, not necessarily all of our markets, but
in almost all of our markets. It certainly won't keep pace with the hockey [stick] growth that you've seen over the last year or 2, the kind of
COVID years. But I think it remains -- I mean just look at the numbers we posted this quarter and last quarter, was an indication of kind of
where things are and how they look like they're kind of settling out on a normal run rate. But Peter, I don't know if you want to comment
macro.
 
Peter M. Moglia
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - CEO & Co-CIO
Yes. I mean supply continues to be tight. So as new opportunities come about, we are -- we have continued to increase rents. We've -- we
typically, even in our new developments as we lease them up, they do tick up 1% or 2% over time. So I guess, macro-wise, without trying
to predict what the actual percentages are, they are still increasing at this point in time, and we don't see any evidence that, that's going
to slow down.
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
Yes. And I think, again, you have to look at that question really almost has to be asked submarket by submarket, not market by market,
Dave. What goes on in Cambridge is going to be far different than what goes on in Summerville, for example.
 
David Bryan Rodgers
Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division - Senior Research Analyst
No, that makes sense. We look forward to getting into more details probably at the Investor Day.
 
Operator
The next question comes from Tom Catherwood from BTIG.
 
William Thomas Catherwood
BTIG, LLC, Research Division - Director & REIT Analyst
Peter, maybe looping back on the supply question. In prior quarters, you mentioned that, obviously, you track all the planned or proposed
development that's out there in your markets and redevelopments, obviously. But you've also commented that you didn't think all of
those were going to make it to market or get started. Given the recent movement in rates and then kind of lack of capital availability,
have you seen any pullback in those starts? Or do you feel even more convinced that you're not going to see all those come to market in
the near to medium-term?
 
Peter M. Moglia
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - CEO & Co-CIO
Yes. I mean we have been receiving some anecdotes of projects that were on the radar that are not going to happen even a couple that
started construction have paused. I mean I talked about cost escalations in my prepared remarks, and they continue to recap. I didn't go
into a lot of percentages because I didn't want to talk for 20 minutes. But just year-over-year from Q2 '21 -- I'm sorry, Q3 '21 to Q3 '22,
they were above 13.5%. So it has just become very expensive. And I think that's giving a lot of people silver in up, a lot of people that were
ready to jump in and try to get involved.
So we don't expect there to be a huge supply problem in any of our markets. From what we see under construction, it looks to be a fairly
normal rate in a normal environment at this point. And as long as that continues, everyone's being rational, we should continue to see
good rent growth, not 2021 rent growth, but not the hockey stick that we experienced that Joel referenced, but good. And usually, over
time, we've exceeded inflation, and I'm not saying we're going to do that now with the inflation numbers. But as soon as inflation
normalizes, I would imagine that we would continue to exceed it.
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
Yes. But again, you have to take that supply issue submarket by submarket. Again, what supply might be in Cambridge versus what it
might be in Summerville, it's talking about like night and day out a handful of years. So you have to think about -- you can't generalize
even to a market about supply. But it's pretty clear in addition to, I think, the important points Peter raised about either capital pausing
or operators pausing, I think it's pretty clear cities are having and other jurisdictions. It's just tougher to get things approved. They're
requiring more concessions. Residential is becoming a big issue. We know in some jurisdictions, if you don't have a resi as part of your
project, you're in a long line. If you have it, you may go to the head of the line. There's a lot of dynamics now on a national basis that are, I
think, changing and that will be a good check on supply.
 
William Thomas Catherwood
BTIG, LLC, Research Division - Director & REIT Analyst
Got it. And then last one, I appreciate the detail on the stuff this quarter on 325 Binney. Obviously, a lot of color in there. Have there been
any changes recently with tenants increasing their sustainability requirements for their facilities? And kind of what is the cost differential
of going lead platinum and lead 0 energy like 325 Binney versus a more traditional lab design?
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
Certainly (inaudible).
 
Dean A. Shigenaga
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - President & CFO
Yes, maybe 325 is a good example. And I think the way to think about this is you do have some advantages when you do sustainability
initiatives from the start. It's a lot more efficient. You can -- I think that project incurred something around that 6% to 7% range of cost to
really end up being able to describe it as becoming the most sustainable lab building in Cambridge. As you guys know, it's probably the
most important and unique feature, is taking advantage of geothermal energy for heating and cooling of the building, which, along with
other attributes of the design allows us to eliminate almost all of fossil fuel consumption for the building.
It's an important attribute for Moderna, the CEO e-mail their team as soon as the lease was signed literally as soon it was assigned and
said, let's get moving and make this one of the coolest, most sustainable green buildings in Cambridge. And so they were passionate
about it. Most of our large pharma and big bio tenants have already publicly announced sustainability initiatives. So they do find it
important. Likely, was in the early days, where you had a cost element to it that we all had to get our head around. And we did early on,
we had the first Core and Shell LEED certified building. And so we were a pioneer there and continuing to be a leader in sustainability
here in lab buildings.
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
Yes. I also think you have to pay attention to the time we're in. So I think tenants are given today's inflationary spiral and kind of what's
going on broadly. I think tenants are maybe somewhat -- it depends on the size, the nature and so forth, bigger tenants are more attuned
to this. But I think a little less attuned to sustainability today and more focused on the recruitment, retention and return of their
workforce, and then also recognizing that if you just read any number of articles on China's major ramp-up of coal-fired plants and coal
use, and certainly in India, too, it's pretty clear by scientists, almost a matter of what we do here in the United States until that part of the
equation is solved for the planet Earth. These measures aren't going to make a difference in global warming.
 
Operator
The next question comes from Michael Carroll from RBC Capital Markets.
 
Michael Albert Carroll
RBC Capital Markets, Research Division - Analyst
Joel, can you provide an update on the newer cluster. I know there's a proposed $1.6 billion life science hub that could be built over the
next decade. I mean it sounds like there's a lot of buildings to build out the science infrastructure here. And should we think about these
investments as a way to further build out this cluster and kind of the important step to make this more of a merger cluster over the next
decade or so?
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
Yes. Well, I would refer you to -- and a good question to our September 12 press release, where we talked about a range of issues in New
York. New York is a very complicated market. It still remains a small company market. I'll come back to that initiative in a moment.
Probably 250,000 square foot of lease -- actual leasing last year. So that's a very small market. We started that market. There were
literally only 2 commercial companies in New York doing research when we started. Today, the number approaches 75, 80 or more, but
it's a slow growth. It's gestation periods, 25 years or more, we're 12 years into it. So the market is not going to be grown by any supply. It's
going to be grown by capital, helping create companies. That's the only way that market is going to grow. You're not going to have big
pharmas like they're doing like we signed these 2 leases a quarter or 2 ago with Lilly in Boston and BMS, Bristol-Myers in San Diego.
You'll never see that in New York because of the -- just the nature of the topography and geography there. You've got very high tax
burden and you've got some safety issues going on now that hopefully maybe the governor and others will wake up to. But it's -- that's
the kind of market it is. It's a small company market. It's a great place, but it's different than every other market. It's unique compared to
all the other clusters. With respect to the state and city effort in Kips Bay. There -- it's a pretty broad and deep effort. Much of it is
institutional and governmentally-driven. There is a thought of building or a plan to build a tower in that area, but probably to get -- go
through the land use approvals will take 2-plus years and then go through an RFP process and then the development process, it's maybe
a decade away. But I think what's really needed is company creation there to really continue to foster the demand. And that's kind of -- I
mean we know that market because we literally help create that market. So that's the state of play there.
 
Michael Albert Carroll
RBC Capital Markets, Research Division - Analyst
Does that investment, I guess, improve the longer-term outlook for that cluster and maybe increase the likelihood of you (inaudible) in
Phase III? I mean, I don't know the time line is probably too early to say, but does that make you more encouraged that things that are
coming around there?
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
Well, those are -- I mean, I think it's good. Anytime you can continue to build infrastructure for institutions and governmental bodies that
are doing research or developing. Part of that is healthcare delivery services, which we're not involved with. So those are all good things.
That's the East Side Medical Corridor really at its best. We're anchored between Bellevue and NYU and that's why we chose that site
when we responded to the RFP by mayor, Bloomberg. But I think it's fair to say what really is needed is capital and company formation
because that will be the lifeblood that will really grow that market over time. And what we've helped grow it over the last 12 years. That's
what it's been.
 
Michael Albert Carroll
RBC Capital Markets, Research Division - Analyst
Okay. Great. And then just last one for me. With regards to your investment book, I know the capital markets are a little bit dislocated
right now. Is ARE finding better opportunities to deploy capital in that investment book? And when you typically look at new investments,
are they more strategic? Or are you taking more opportunistic views just given where maybe some opportunities may lie given it might be
difficult for some of those companies to find attractive capital right now?
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
Well, I think as Hallie said, there's been an all-time high venture fund capital raise this year, and that is kind of invested sprinkled out
over a 3, 4, 5, maybe even longer time period. And I think it's fair to say that great companies with great technology, high unmet medical
needs, protected IP, good IP, just really smart people at the scientific helm and the business helm will generally always attract capital. I
mean, we invested in Alnylam back in 2003 when it was a startup company because we felt that RNAi had great promise, but it took 15
to 20 years to prove, but it was a great investment.
That company has gone on to do great things and has a huge footprint in Cambridge. And then in 2013, which again was before the bull
market started to happen, we took an early investment in Moderna and everybody knows the story there. So sometimes down markets as
things are, valuations are better, and they give you interesting opportunities that really are focused on totally, I would say,
groundbreaking technologies that may create tremendous opportunities for shots on goal on so many of the diseases that we're all
suffering from. So -- that's how we look at it. So yes, good time to invest.
 
Operator
The next question comes from Joshua Dennerlein from Bank of America.
 
Joshua Dennerlein
I appreciate all the color today. I just had a question on the guidance. What gets you to the high and low end of same-store cash
guidance? And then also same for the capitalized interest guide.
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
Yes. So Dean?
 
Dean A. Shigenaga
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - President & CFO
So if you look at our guidance today, same property, call it the midpoint, is 7% GAAP, 7.8% cash. And I think my commentary earlier
highlighted we're at 7% for 9 months on GAAP. So we're right on the midpoint today. And we're at 8.9%, we're on the upper end on a
cash basis. So we're at a good perspective for 9 months. And I kind of highlighted the outlier drivers occupancy growth driving a 2x
benefit to NOI. So we had 100 year-to-date for 9 months, 110 basis point occupancy growth with a double impact, at least to NOI and
then early lease renewals early, early in 2022, which was also driving the strength. So that's the backdrop. We've got a good run rate for
the 9 months, which will carry us into a comfortable spot with our outlook for the full year.
 
Joshua Dennerlein
Dean, what about the capitalized interest, the upper and lower ranges?
 
Dean A. Shigenaga
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - President & CFO
Look, I think the way to think about cap interest and interest expense, we don't change those numbers very often. The run rate that
you've seen for capped interest this year is probably reflective of the volume of construction activities in our business, which continue an
upward trend at the moment, meaning capped interest probably on a quarterly basis, doesn't peak out until probably Q1 of '23. So you're
still on an upward trajectory as our -- and that's just a pure function of what you would call construction in progress or the basis that's
under construction, which drives the amount of capped interest. The interest rate drives it a little bit, but so much of our costs are fixed.
There's very little variable cost for interest expense. So it's really just a function of spend quarter-to-quarter, adding to CIP at a pace
that's outpacing the deliveries which, as I mentioned earlier, will start to peak out here in the next quarter or 2.
 
Operator
And for our last question, we have a follow-up from Michael Griffin from Citi.
 
Michael Anderson Griffin
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - Senior Associate
I'm just curious, obviously, we saw the news about GE moving out 5 Necco. What are the prospects potentially to backfill this space? And
would you attempt to sublease it could it be a potential conversion opportunity? And are there worries that there might be more of this
coming down the pipe for your traditional office users, I think it's about 8% of the portfolio, but any commentary there would be great.
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
Yes. So maybe I'll ask Dean to comment, but one thing to keep in mind, there's an existing lease with a credit tenant. But Dean?
 
Dean A. Shigenaga
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - President & CFO
Yes. That's the key concept. And I guess the other thing to keep in mind, Michael, there's always -- it's interesting in the articles that do
arise on any company. And most companies will choose not to comment specifically about articles in the press. As Joel mentioned, we do
have a lease with a credit behind it. It's somewhere around 80,000 square feet in the Seaport market. But beyond that, we don't really
have much to comment on.
 
Operator
And this concludes our question-and-answer session. I would like to turn the conference back over to Joel Marcus for any closing
remarks.
 
Joel S. Marcus
Alexandria Real Estate Equities, Inc. - Founder & Executive Chairman
Well, we'll make it quick. Thank you, and stay safe, everybody.
 
Operator
The conference has now concluded. Thank you for attending today's presentation. You may now disconnect.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.