CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
Andrew Dodd Fentress
ACRES Commercial Realty Corp. - Chairman of the Board
 
David J. Bryant
ACRES Commercial Realty Corp. - Senior VP, CFO & Treasurer
 
Kyle K. Brengel
ACRES Commercial Realty Corp. - VP
 
Mark Steven Fogel
ACRES Commercial Realty Corp. - President, CEO & Director
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
Christopher Muller
JMP Securities LLC, Research Division - VP & Equity Research Analyst
 
Stephen Albert Laws
Raymond James & Associates, Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Good day, ladies and gentlemen, and welcome to the Third Quarter 2022 ACRES Commercial Realty Corporation Earnings Conference
Call. (Operator Instructions) As a reminder, this call is being recorded. I would now like to introduce your host for today's conference, Kyle
Brengel, Vice President. You may begin.
 
Kyle K. Brengel
ACRES Commercial Realty Corp. - VP
Good afternoon, and thank you for joining our call. I would like to highlight that we have posted the Q3 2022 shareholder presentation to
our website. This presentation contains a summary and detailed information about the quarterly and year-to-date results of the
company.
Before we begin, I want to remind everyone that certain statements made during this call are not based on historical information and
may constitute forward-looking statements. When used in this conference call, the words believes, anticipates, expects and similar
expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements.
Although the company believes that these forward-looking statements are based on reasonable assumptions, such statements are
based on management's current expectations and beliefs and are subject to several trends, risks and uncertainties and that could cause
actual results to differ materially from those contained in the forward-looking statements.
These risks and uncertainties are discussed in the company's reports filed with the SEC, including its reports on Forms 8-K, 10-Q and
10-K, and in particular, the Risk Factors section of its Form 10-K. Listeners are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these
forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date hereof. The company undertakes no obligation to update any of these
forward-looking statements.
Furthermore, certain non-GAAP financial measures may be discussed on this conference call. Our presentation of this information is not
intended to be considered in isolation or as a substitute to the financial information presented in accordance with GAAP. Reconciliations
of non-GAAP financial measures to the most comparable measures prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles are contained in the earnings presentation for the past quarter.
With me on the call today are Mark Fogel, President and CEO; and Dave Bryant, ACR's CFO. Also available for Q&A is Andrew Fentress,
Chairman of ACR. I will now turn the call over to Mark.
 
Mark Steven Fogel
ACRES Commercial Realty Corp. - President, CEO & Director
Good afternoon, everyone, and thank you for joining our call. Today, I will provide an overview of our loan originations, real estate
investments and the health of the investment portfolio, while Dave Bryant will discuss the financial statements, liquidity condition, book
value and operating results for the third quarter and provide an update on 2022 projected results. Of course, we look forward to your
questions at the end of our prepared remarks.
The ACRES origination team delivered $181.3 million of new loan commitments in the third quarter, comprising 3 hotel loans, 2 office
loans and 1 multifamily loan. Loan payoffs during the period were $83.5 million, and net unfunded commitments during the quarter were
$27.9 million, producing a net increase of the portfolio of $69.9 million.
The newly originated loans pay coupon interest at the 1-month benchmark rates, which comprised SOFR plus a weighted average spread
of 6.04%. The weighted average spread of the floating rate loans and our $2.1 billion commercial real estate loan portfolio increased to
3.76% over the 1-month benchmark rates. The weighted average benchmark rate is 3.65% as of 10/25/22. We observed spread widening
in the period and are mindful of further potential widening as we deploy capital on our way to getting the company fully invested.
As stated on our last call, we plan to maintain a loan book balance of $2 billion to $2.3 billion through 2022. During the quarter, we sold
a former $19.9 million loan secured by an office property in Chicago that the company acquired by (inaudible) in 2021. At the time of the
foreclosure, the asset was valued at $17.6 million. We sold the asset at $19.25 million prior to closing costs and other basis adjustments
that resulted in a gain on the sale of real estate of $1.9 million included in GAAP net income. Also during the quarter, we redeemed the
remaining $48.2 million of 4.5% convertible senior notes that the company issued in 2017.
Finally, a few comments on balance sheet items as we know this topic is top of mind for many investors given the recent market volatility
and base rate increases. The company has a healthy liquidity and financing profile. The company has warehouse lines opened with
JPMorgan and Morgan Stanley with performing collateral on each. The company also has agreed in principle to terms with MassMutual
on an upsize and improved terms for its current facility, which is being documented this quarter. The Barclays line, which has 0 collateral
is being voluntarily closed by the company in the current quarter.
The portfolio continues to perform, demonstrating sound and consistent underwriting and proactive asset management. The company
ended the quarter with $2.1 billion of commercial real estate loans across 88 individual investments, of which only 2 comprising 1.4% of
the portfolio were delinquent. As of September 30, there were 6 watch list loans, inclusive of the 2 delinquent loans, representing 5.6%
of the portfolio.
As we have discussed previously, the company holds 4 investments in real estate that we expect to monetize for a gain in the future.
These gains will be offset by the existing NOL and corresponding cash retained and reinvested into the loan portfolio. Lastly, there are 2
hotel assets currently classified as held for sale as a result of being in a formal sale process. Early indications give us comfort that
proceeds will be at or above par, a testament to the work of the asset management team here at ACRES who work diligently to protect
shareholder value during a challenging hospitality market over the last 2.5 years.
In summary, the ACRES team is pleased with the quality of the investment portfolio including investments in real estate, along with the
improved balance sheet profile and the prospects for new originations and capital appreciation going forward. We will continue to
execute on our business plan by selectively originating high-quality investments, actively managing the portfolio and continuing to focus
on growing earnings and book value for our shareholders.
We will now have ACR's CFO, Dave Bryant, to discuss the financial statements and operating results during the third quarter of 2022.
 
David J. Bryant
ACRES Commercial Realty Corp. - Senior VP, CFO & Treasurer
Thank you, and good afternoon. GAAP net income allocable to common shares in the third quarter was approximately $700,000 or
$0.08 per share. earnings available for distribution for the third quarter were $0.40 per share and included the net charge-off of the sale
of a foreclosed office property of approximately $400,000 or $0.04 per share as our EAD policy is to charge off losses upon realized
transactions as opposed to loss estimates required by GAAP.
GAAP book value per share increased to $25.08 on September 30 from $24.48 on June 30. The increase to book value per share for the
third quarter was primarily driven by $0.36 of per share accretion from common stock repurchases, $0.11 related to the noncash equity
expense and net income of $0.08 per share. Available liquidity at September 30, 2022, was approximately $86.4 million, which
comprised approximately $61 million of unrestricted cash, $10.5 million of projected financing available on unlevered assets and $14.9
million of reinvestment cash available in CRE securitizations.
GAAP debt-to-equity leverage ratio increased marginally to 4.3x on September 30 from 4.2x on June 30. Our recourse debt leverage
ratio also increased marginally to 1.5x on September 30 from 1.4x on June 30. The increase to the leverage and recourse leverage ratios
was primarily due to increased borrowings on our bank term facilities, offset by the repayment of our 4.5% convertible senior notes.
In the third quarter, the company recorded an increase in loan loss reserves under the CECL calculations of approximately $2.6 million
compared to a $500,000 provision in the second quarter. The increase to general reserves reflects continuing changes in the
macroeconomic outlook under the CECL calculations. The total allowance for credit losses on September 30 was $7.8 million, which
represents 0.37% or 37 basis points of the $2.1 billion loan portfolio at par.
Turning to results from the company's real estate investments. Net loss from real estate investments remains relatively flat at $314,000
in the third quarter. Included in the third quarter property operating loss was $1.3 million of noncash depreciation and amortization. Also,
as Mark mentioned in his opening remarks, the company had a $1.9 million realized gain on the sale of an office property in Chicago. The
gain included proceeds received over the property valuation basis, as well as the recovery of accrued real estate taxes.
Focusing on G&A. The third quarter expense of $2.1 million versus second quarter reflects the seasonality for quarterly G&A we typically
see this time of year. We'll see a slight increase during the fourth quarter as the year-end audit procedures begin to incur this seasonal
expense. Regarding share repurchases during the third quarter, the company used $1.8 million of the board approved share repurchase
plan of $20 million to redeem approximately 198,000 shares at approximately a 64% discount to book value per share on September 30.
There is approximately $8.1 million remaining on the program at quarter-end.
Looking forward, we currently project that the company will produce GAAP income between $0.10 and $0.20 per share and EAD of $1.10
per share for calendar year 2022. Our projection remains subject to volatility from rate increases, loan payoff volume, CECL reserve
adjustments and other nonrecurring or unexpected items that may arise in the remaining 3 months of the year. With the loan growth of
$264.6 million in the first 9 months of 2022, we expect our net income and earnings available for distribution to remain positive and
steadily grow for the balance of 2022 and into 2023. Retained earnings and any capital gains generated from real estate equity
investments will allow the company to grow its loan portfolio in future periods.
Now I will turn the call to Andrew Fentress for closing remarks.
 
Andrew Dodd Fentress
ACRES Commercial Realty Corp. - Chairman of the Board
Thank you, David. We are mindful of the changes in the rate market and corresponding volatility in asset prices creates a heightened
sense of anxiety over the fear of the unknowns. Management wants to remove many of these unknowns as possible with regard to the
company that you own. As you've heard from our CEO, Mark and CFO, David, the company is performing well, has a strong portfolio,
ample liquidity and is managed by a team of professionals who have been through several cycles during their careers. We remain vigilant
in our mission to deliver shareholder's value over the long term. We do this by investing in and managing high-quality assets that will
produce a stable and growing book value for our shareholders.
This concludes our opening remarks. I'll now turn the call back over to the operator for questions. Thank you.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) The first question today comes from Chris Muller with JMP Securities.
 
Christopher Muller
JMP Securities LLC, Research Division - VP & Equity Research Analyst
I'm on for Steve today. So I'm sorry if I missed this at the beginning, I jumped on a few minutes late. But we've seen a lot of headwinds in
the office space with a couple of other peers downgrading a bunch of loans and as you guys did 2 office loans in the quarter. So I guess,
what do you guys look for in an office loan in this environment? And do you expect to do more office loans in the near term?
 
Mark Steven Fogel
ACRES Commercial Realty Corp. - President, CEO & Director
Yes. This is Mark. Thanks for the question. It's not our strategy to go after office loans and make it a focus of the company. But we've
always been a lender that identifies good opportunities in the marketplace where our borrowers, our sponsors are buying properties at a
really good basis. These 2 particular loans were purchased at prices that made a lot of sense to us. We went in at a really good structure,
low LTC and the deals work very well in the markets in which they exist. So looking for high-quality assets always. And as you might
imagine, in the office sector, there's a lot of availability for lenders, and we're trying to pick the best of the best with the best sponsors.
 
Christopher Muller
JMP Securities LLC, Research Division - VP & Equity Research Analyst
Got it. That's helpful. And then just the other one I have, the big jump in spreads from quarter-to-quarter. Is that just a heavier
construction component on loans? Or is there anything else behind that?
 
Mark Steven Fogel
ACRES Commercial Realty Corp. - President, CEO & Director
No, I think that's really just a function of the market. There's certainly a widening of spreads out there amongst our peer group in that,
what we're seeing is a lot of lenders sitting on the sideline giving groups that have capital the opportunity to really dictate terms as
compared to 12 months ago or even 9 months ago. And none of that is construction lending. We don't do construction lending in the
REIT.
 
Christopher Muller
JMP Securities LLC, Research Division - VP & Equity Research Analyst
Okay. And then what are the unfunded commitments for? Is that just like milestones they have to hit on the projects?
 
Mark Steven Fogel
ACRES Commercial Realty Corp. - President, CEO & Director
It's hold backs for lease-up and capital improvements, but it's not for ground-up construction.
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) The next question comes from Stephen Laws with Raymond James.
 
Stephen Albert Laws
Raymond James & Associates, Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
Mark, can you talk a little bit about use of capital, relative attractiveness between repurchasing your stock, new investments. Obviously,
you mentioned the originations at [600] or more over or simply building some liquidity for maybe more attractive opportunities that you
may think present themselves in the quarters ahead? And finally, additional real estate investments, if that's something you're looking
at?
 
Andrew Dodd Fentress
ACRES Commercial Realty Corp. - Chairman of the Board
Steve, it's Andrew. On the first part of the question with respect to capital allocation. So as you know, we have an open repurchase
program ongoing in the marketplace. And we're able to really repurchase the maximum amount that is available to the company under
their share repurchase rules, which are -- is really governed by the average daily volume that shares trade on the exchange each day. So
we're limited in that regard in terms of share repurchases, and we're doing the best and the most of the company can. So with regard to
liquidity, after that, there's -- first up is to originate high-quality assets that will go into loan portfolio. Spreads as we identified did widen
to levels where we're [600] over now. And we're certainly mindful of liquidity. We think the company has a healthy amount of liquidity on
balance sheet today with over $85 million of cash and then more available to us as assets obviously repay will redeploy. So we think
we're in a good place on those 3 fronts.
 
Stephen Albert Laws
Raymond James & Associates, Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
Great. And Dave, can you touch base on CECL, I think you're doing to adopt early next year. Will that be similar to initial adoption a few
years ago where there's an overnight write-down to book and then you take provisioning or releases through the income statement? Or
will it all run through the income statement? Can you give us any color on how that's going to work?
 
David J. Bryant
ACRES Commercial Realty Corp. - Senior VP, CFO & Treasurer
Yes, it would actually run through the income statement if, in fact, it resulted in a change for us. We've taken a look at what some of the
model -- proposed model changes that we use it's an outsourced model that most of the commercial mortgage REITs are using, all the
ones that I'm aware of anyway. And we actually don't think it will result right now in a significant change, and it might actually be a slight
recovery. But we don't expect there to be a significant change. I think the bigger risk for our reserves would be what the macroeconomic
outlook is and how that plays itself out in the modeling, a longer period of inflation, a recession, things that would worsen the outlook.
 
Operator
This concludes our question-and-answer session. I would like to turn the conference back over to Andrew Fentress for any closing
remarks.
 
Andrew Dodd Fentress
ACRES Commercial Realty Corp. - Chairman of the Board
Thank you, everybody, for joining the call. We appreciate everybody's participation and input and look forward to any follow-up questions
over the coming days and weeks. Have a good evening, everyone. Thank you.
 
Operator
The conference has now concluded. Thank you for attending today's presentation. You may now disconnect.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
©2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.