CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
Brian Robert Dickman
Getty Realty Corp. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
 
Christopher J. Constant
Getty Realty Corp. - President, CEO & Director
 
Joshua Dicker
Getty Realty Corp. - Executive VP, General Counsel & Corporate Secretary
 
Mark J. Olear
Getty Realty Corp. - Executive VP, CIO & COO
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
John James Massocca
Ladenburg Thalmann & Co. Inc., Research Division - Associate
 
Todd Michael Thomas
KeyBanc Capital Markets Inc., Research Division - MD & Senior Equity Research Analyst
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Good morning, and welcome to Getty Realty's Earnings Conference Call for the Third Quarter 2022. (Operator Instructions).
Prior to the starting of the call, Joshua Dicker, Executive Vice President, General Counsel and Secretary of the company, will read a safe
harbor statement and provide information about the non-GAAP financial measures. Please go ahead, Mr. Dicker.
 
Joshua Dicker
Getty Realty Corp. - Executive VP, General Counsel & Corporate Secretary
Thank you, operator. I would like to thank you all for joining us for Getty Realty's third quarter earnings conference call. Yesterday
afternoon, the company released its financial results for the quarter ended September 30, 2022. The Form 8-K and earnings release are
available in the Investor Relations section of our website at gettyrealty.com.
Certain statements made in the course of this call are not based on historical information and may constitute forward-looking
statements. These statements are based on management's current expectations and beliefs and are subject to trends, events and
uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those described in the forward-looking statements. Examples of
forward-looking statements include our 2022 guidance and may also include statements made by management in their remarks and in
response to questions, including regarding the company's future company operations, future financial performance and the company's
acquisition or redevelopment plans and opportunities. We caution you that such statements reflect our best judgment based on factors
currently known to us and that actual events or results could differ materially.
I refer you to the company's annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021, and our other filings made with the SEC
for a more detailed discussion of the risks and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or
implied in any forward-looking statements made today.
You should not place undue reliance on forward-looking statements, which reflect our view only as of the date hereof. The company
undertakes no duty to update any forward-looking statements that may be made in the course of this call. Also, please refer to our
earnings release for a discussion of our use of non-GAAP financial measures, including our updated definition of adjusted funds from
operations, or AFFO, and our reconciliation of those measures to net earnings.
With that, let me turn the call over to Christopher Constant, our Chief Executive Officer.
 
Christopher J. Constant
Getty Realty Corp. - President, CEO & Director
Thank you, Joshua. Good morning, everyone, and welcome to our earnings call for the third quarter of 2022. Joining us on the call today
are Mark Olear, our Chief Operating Officer; and Brian Dickman, our Chief Financial Officer. I will lead off today's call by providing
commentary on the quarter's financial results and investment activities and offer some observations and perspectives on the company's
strong position despite unsettled market conditions, which are impacting companies and consumers across the country. As usual, Mark
will then take you through our portfolio, and Brian will discuss our financial results in more detail.
We are pleased with the performance of our retail net lease platform in the third quarter. Our in-place portfolio continues to perform
well, generating stable cash flows and rent coverage, and we continue to execute on our growth strategy with a positive earnings
trajectory and an increased investment pipeline. For the quarter, our base rental income grew 7.7%. Our adjusted funds from operations
or AFFO increased 6.7% and our AFFO per share grew to $0.54. Year-to-date, the company has invested more than $80 million,
including approximately $21 million in the third quarter and subsequent to quarter end and high-quality CNG and car wash properties
located in attractive growth markets such as Austin, Charleston and San Antonio. The dedicated efforts of our team have led to a net
increase in our committed investment pipeline to more than $150 million from the acquisition and development of new-to-industry
convenience stores, auto service centers and car wash properties, which we expect to fund over the next year or so.
Equally important, our strong liquidity position and select capital raising activities will allow us to lock in attractive investment spreads
and accretively fund these transactions. Brian will elaborate further in his remarks, but we have already raised or identified funding for
approximately 75% of this transaction activity at costs meaningfully inside of prevailing market rates. And we've done so while
maintaining low leverage and an undrawn revolver to provide capacity to fund the balance of this activity and further growth. Our team
continues to underwrite opportunities across all of our target asset classes, and we remain disciplined in our approach as we navigate an
evolving marketplace.
Our strategy continues to emphasize owning high-quality real estate and partnering with growing regional and national operators across
the convenience and automotive retail sectors. With our relationships, underwriting expertise and an expanding opportunity set, we are
confident in our ability to continue executing on our investment strategy and further diversifying our portfolio while remaining disciplined
in an environment where asset pricing is currently undergoing a significant change.
Given our performance year-to-date and expected future growth, our Board approved an increase of 4.9% in our recurring quarterly
dividend to $0.43 per share. This represents the ninth straight year we have grown the dividend alongside our earnings growth. Our
Board believes this annual increase is appropriate as it maintains a stable payout ratio and reflects the company's growth prospects for
2023. Additionally, as a result of our year-to-date investment in capital activities, we are raising our 2022 AFFO guidance to a range of
$2.12 to $2.13 per share.
I want to reiterate, despite the challenging macro environment, we are open for business. Our teams continue to work diligently to source
and underwrite accretive investment opportunities and to raise long-term permanent capital to finance that growth. We believe Getty is
very well positioned for the current environment, given the essential nature of our assets, the operating strength of our institutional
tenant base and our well-positioned balance sheet, including low leverage and ample liquidity. We remain confident in our ability to
create shareholder value through earnings growth and portfolio diversification as we move through the end of 2022 and into 2023.
With that, I will turn the call over to Mark to discuss our portfolio and investment activities.
 
Mark J. Olear
Getty Realty Corp. - Executive VP, CIO & COO
Thank you, Chris. As of the end of the third quarter, our portfolio includes 1,013 net lease properties, 4 active redevelopment sites and 4
vacant properties. Our weighted average lease term was 8.6 years, and our overall occupancy, excluding active redevelopments,
increased to 99.6%. Our portfolio spans 38 states across the country plus Washington D.C. And our annualized base rents, 65% of which
come from the top 50 MSAs in the U.S. and 84% coming from the top 100 MSAs are well covered by our trailing 12-month tenant rent
coverage ratio of 2.7x.
And in terms of our investment activities, in the third quarter, we invested $14.9 million across 8 properties, and after quarter end added
an additional $6.4 million on 2 additional properties, bringing our total year-to-date investment to $80.5 million. Also this quarter's
investments include closing on the acquisition and leaseback of 2 Go Car Wash properties for a total of $9.1 million, 1 located in Austin,
Texas and another in the San Antonio MSA, providing approximately $5.8 million of construction funding for the development of 6 new
industry properties, 2 convene stores in the Charleston, South Carolina MSA, 1 convenience store in the Austin, Texas MSA and 3 carwash
properties into Jacksonville, Fairhaven, Connecticut and Newberg, New York MSAs. As part of these funding transactions, we will accrue
interest on our investments during the construction phase of the projects and acquire the properties via sale-leaseback upon completion
and final funding.
For the third quarter, the aggregate initial cash yield of our investment activity was approximately 6.7% and the weighted average lease
term for the acquired properties was 14.9 years. Year-to-date, the aggregate initial cash yield on our investment activity is approximately
6.6% and the weighted average lease term for acquired properties is 14.9 years. Year-to-date, 100% of our investment activity has been
directly sourced by our acquisition team and includes a mixture of repeat business with existing tenants and new convenience and
automotive retail tenants. 84% of the investments were derived from new sale-leaseback transactions, which are subject to a long-term
triple-net lease and 16% were derived from development funding, renew industry assets that we expect to acquire via sale leaseback
upon completion of the project.
Looking ahead, regarding the $150 million of commitments to fund acquisitions and developments that Chris referenced, while we have
fully executed agreements for each transaction, the timing and amount of each investment is ultimately dependent on our counterparties
and the schedules under which they are able to complete development projects and close certain business acquisitions. We expect to
fund these transactions throughout the next 12 months or so with the average initial yields of approximately 20 basis points in access
where we have closed acquisitions year-to-date. We continue to underwrite a variety of potential investment opportunities during the
quarter with convenience stores representing 58% of the underwritten volume and other convenience and automotive retail sectors
representing the balance.
As discussed on our last call, we are seeing continued asset movement in asset pricing across all of our target asset classes as the retail
net lease market adjusts to the changed economic landscape and tighter credit markets. While the speed and magnitude of this
movement has not yet caught up to the increase in capital cost across the market, we believe we are well positioned to invest accretively
as we move through the end of '22 and into 2023. Moving to our redevelopment platform. During the quarter, we invested approximately
$300,000 in projects, which are in various stages in our pipeline. We completed one redevelopment project where rent commenced on a
new drive-through Chase Bank location in Boston MSA. We invested $700,000 in the project and generated a return on invested capital
of 8.4%.
We ended the quarter with 6 signed leases or letters of intent, which includes 4 active projects, one project at a property, which is
currently subject to a triple net lease and have not yet been recaptured from the current tenant and one signed LOI on a vacant property.
The company expects rent to commence at these and other projects over the next set years, including later in 2022. Turning to our asset
management activities for the third quarter. We sold 3 properties realizing $1 million in gross proceeds and exited 1 leased property. We'll
continue to pursue dispositions of properties. We have determined either no longer are competitive in their current format and do not
have compelling redevelopment potential, which we believe have compelling valuations that may allow us to recycle capital as part of
managing our balance sheet and sources of capital.
With that, I turn the call over to Brian.
 
Brian Robert Dickman
Getty Realty Corp. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
Thanks, Mark. Good morning, everyone. Last night, we reported FFO per share of $0.54 for the third quarter, representing a
year-over-year increase of 1.9% versus the $0.53 per share we reported in the third quarter of 2021. For the quarter, FFO and net income
were $0.50 and $0.27 per share, respectively. Total revenues were up 4.7% to $42 million for the quarter. And base rental income, which
excludes tenant reimbursements, GAAP revenue adjustments and any additional rent, grew 7.4% to $37 million. Our acquisition activity
over the last 12 months and recurring rent escalators in our leases were the primary drivers of the increase with additional contribution
from completed redevelopment projects.
On the expense side, G&A costs were $5 million for the quarter, a slight increase of $300,000 compared to the third quarter of 2021 as a
result of increased personnel costs. Property costs declined $5.7 million declined to $5.7 million due to lower property operating
expenses, including a permanent reduction in rent expense as we have exited 10 leased properties over the past 12 months. These
reductions were partially offset by increases in leasing and development costs, primarily increased professional fees associated with
potential redevelopment projects. Environmental expenses, which are highly variable due to a number of estimates and noncash
adjustments, declined to $632,000 for the quarter versus $757,000 in 2021, primarily due to a reduction in estimates related to unknown
environmental liabilities.
Turning to the balance sheet and our capital markets activities. We ended the quarter with $625 million of total debt outstanding,
consisting entirely of senior unsecured notes with a weighted average interest rate of 4.1% and a weighted average maturity of 6.4 years.
We have no floating rate debt exposure other than our $300 million unsecured revolving credit facility, which was undrawn at quarter
end. And having addressed our 2023 notes maturity with our February private placement, we have no debt maturities until 2025. As of
September 30, net debt to EBITDA was 4.9x, and total debt to total capitalization was 32%, while total indebtedness to total asset value,
as defined in our credit agreement, was 36%.
During the quarter, we entered into forward sale agreements to sell 714,000 common shares through our ATM program at $30.22 per
share, which will generate gross proceeds of $21.6 million. To date, no shares subject to formal sale agreements have been settled.
Returning to our $150 million committed investment pipeline and associated financing. We have $125 million of 3.65% unsecured notes
funding in January of 2023, of which $50 million is available to fund investment activity after refinancing our 5.35% notes coming due in
June of 2023. Combining this $50 million of net debt proceeds with $21 million of forward ATM proceeds, $11 million of cash on our
balance sheet, proceeds from select property dispositions and retained cash flow over the next 12 months, and we've raised or identified
over 75% of the capital required to fund our pipeline.
Cost of this capital is meaningfully inside of our current spot rates, and we continue to remain low leverage and an undrawn revolver to
provide flexibility and capacity to fund the balance of the pipeline and additional growth. Pro forma for this investment in capital activity,
we expect our balance sheet to remain strong, including ample liquidity and leverage in line with our previously stated ranges.
As our investment pipeline continues to evolve, we will evaluate all capital sources, including common equity, disposition proceeds and
incremental debt to ensure that we're funding transactions in an accretive manner while our investment-grade credit profile. With
respect to our environmental liability, we ended the quarter at $29.2 million, which was a reduction of $18.4 million from the end of 2021.
The primary driver of the improvement was the removal of $17.1 million of unknown reserve liabilities. As a reminder, these reserves were
related to legacy properties where we retained the responsibility to clean up pre-existing unknown environmental contamination that
was discovered during defined look-back periods, which have expired during 2022. We concluded that there was no material continued
risk of having to satisfy contractual obligations at these properties and accordingly, remove the unknown reserve liabilities, which had
previously been accrued. Our net environmental remediation spending in the quarter was approximately $825,000.
And finally, with respect to our 2022 earnings, as a result of our year-to-date investment in capital markets activities, we are raising our
AFFO per share guidance to a range of $2.12 to $2.13 from our previous range of $2.10 to $2.12. As a reminder, our outlook includes
transaction activity to date, but does not otherwise assume any potential acquisitions, dispositions or capital markets activities for the
remainder of the year. Specific factors which continue to impact our AFFO guidance include variability with respect to certain operating
and deal pursuit costs and approximately $400,000 of demolition costs related to redevelopment projects, which run through property
costs on our P&L.
With that, I will ask the operator to open the call for questions.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) The first question comes from Todd Thomas of KeyBanc Capital Markets.
 
Todd Michael Thomas
KeyBanc Capital Markets Inc., Research Division - MD & Senior Equity Research Analyst
First question, just in terms of asset pricing and the expected yields that you're anticipating on investments, it sounded like you're seeing
some upward pressure on cap rates, but I think you noted the stabilized yield expectation on the $150 million committed pipelines about
20 basis points above the initial yields on the year-to-date investments, which, as you mentioned, was 6.6%. I think that's consistent with
last quarter. How are cap rates trending? Can you provide a little bit more color around what you're seeing in terms of that upward
pressure and what your expectation is over the next few quarters for cap rates?
 
Mark J. Olear
Getty Realty Corp. - Executive VP, CIO & COO
Yes, it's Mark. Thanks for the question. So I'll just restate that the forward commitments are the 20 points basis points higher than the
year-to-date activity. It's been slow, but there is certainly some expansion of cap rates that we're looking at in the kind of activity in the
further outlook pipeline. So again, a little bit slower, but there is some upward movement, and I'm sure we'll capture that.
 
Todd Michael Thomas
KeyBanc Capital Markets Inc., Research Division - MD & Senior Equity Research Analyst
Okay. Can you sort of characterize, I guess, behind this $150 million pipeline today, I guess, can you characterize maybe the shadow
pipeline, I suppose, last quarter, the pipeline was $125 million, it increased by $25 million this quarter. What's behind this? And what's
your appetite like for adding additional investments to the pipeline here?
 
Mark J. Olear
Getty Realty Corp. - Executive VP, CIO & COO
So we continue to see good activity across all the verticals. What we've highlighted here is the focus on staying diverse within all the retail
automotive experience verticals, we're gaining momentum across all those asset classes. And the deal team continues to bring
opportunities for us to underwrite that we'll hopefully continue to grow that forward committed pipeline.
 
Brian Robert Dickman
Getty Realty Corp. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
Todd, this is Brian. I would just add and maybe it's a little bit repetitive. But again, if you look at where the balance sheet is, our ability to
raise some amount of capital along the way to effectively match fund the pipeline. We really feel that we're positioned very well on a go
forward, whether it's drawing on the revolver, whether it's tapping in, we use the forward on the ATM for the first time. I know others have
used that tool. But that's a good tool for our business, and we've used that. We talked a little bit about accelerating some of the
disposition activity on a select basis. So as Mark said, the team is finding investment opportunities, and it's incumbent upon us to
continue to find the financing to fund that activity. And we feel that we're in a good position. And I think Chris summed it up in his
remarks, we're open for business.
 
Todd Michael Thomas
KeyBanc Capital Markets Inc., Research Division - MD & Senior Equity Research Analyst
Yes, that's helpful. I guess, Brian, you discussed the funding sources for the current pipeline, which was helpful. It gives you a runway for
what you've committed to here and your cost of capital has held up relatively well. How should we think about additional forward equity
issuance sort of lock in your cost of capital as you move forward? And also, what about the volume of potential dispositions as we move
into '23?
 
Brian Robert Dickman
Getty Realty Corp. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
Yes. On the equity, look, I think selective is the best way to describe it, right, at the price we raised or we sold on the forward basis in the
third quarter, that obviously works for the business and the investments that we have under contract, but we're cognizant of the
valuation and how that fits into the overall model. So I would say selective, again, we do have the undrawn revolver. We do have low
leverage. So we feel as if we have a lot of flexibility there.
And on the dispositions, I think we talked about this probably maybe as far back as February certainly in April and July, I know we did.
Just looking a little bit more strategically at the portfolio to identify, I think Mark touched on this in his remarks, assets where maybe we
can capture a little bit of value today in the market and pull in some proceeds at greater better costs than the equity markets, but also it's
important, achieving portfolio objectives. So whether that's something that's a shorter lease term or something that's a one-off lease
away from our primary unitary leases, but that are otherwise income-producing properties, looking at some of those select opportunities
to transact from a disposition perspective.
 
Operator
The next question comes from John Massocca of Ladenburg Thalmann.
 
John James Massocca
Ladenburg Thalmann & Co. Inc., Research Division - Associate
Just wondering -- I'm sorry, this is really on the call. Any kind of color on the cadence of the closing for the $150 million that's in the
pipeline? I mean, I know you talked about it on the last call that it was kind of a 12-month window for the $125 million you had at Q2. But
just thinking, should we expect this to be kind of weighted towards the end of this year, leak-out and do maybe as far as June of next
year? Just kind of any color there would be helpful.
 
Brian Robert Dickman
Getty Realty Corp. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
Yes. Sure, John. This is Brian. I'll give you this composition that hopefully will be helpful. About half of that pipeline, just under 55% is
development funding. Those transactions will fund over time and are probably back-end weighted as tenants make their final draws, and
we convert those into sale-leaseback transactions. The balance, 45-plus percent is more regular waste sale-leaseback activity. That's
likely more on the front end of that time range, kind of 3 to 6 months. So when you blend it all out, we continue to think that this
12-month time horizon is the right way to look at it from a modeling perspective, you probably straight-line it over that period. But there's
going to be transactions closing throughout and fundings throughout that may deviate from a straight line across the board. But I think
that's the best assumption is to look at it over 12 months on a relatively equal weighted basis.
 
John James Massocca
Ladenburg Thalmann & Co. Inc., Research Division - Associate
Okay. And then in terms of kind of additional investment activity, how should we think about the competitive environment to do
transactions in the sale leaseback market I know some of the top tenants in your existing portfolio have been pretty active on the M&A
front. I'm just wondering if there's opportunities there because those are larger operators now maybe pricing is still relatively tight for
those type of deals?
 
Brian Robert Dickman
Getty Realty Corp. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
I think with all of our tenants, whether they're in the portfolio or some tenants that we continue to talk to our prospective tenants, we
continue to try to bring into the portfolio. The M&A markets are still active. Obviously, I think pricing is changing, both in M&A multiples
and in the sale-leaseback market, right? But I wouldn't say that there's not an opportunity for getting to do business with one of our
existing tenants large or small. I think the fact that we're out here constantly underwriting activity, doing a good job managing our
balance sheet allows us to be active in today's market, whereas maybe previously, our tenants maybe had the opportunity to get it more
heavily into the bank market or heavily into some other form of financing that may not be as readily available today.
 
John James Massocca
Ladenburg Thalmann & Co. Inc., Research Division - Associate
And I guess maybe just in terms of sale leaseback competition or even kind of granular net lease investment competition, how has that
competitive environment changed even since the Q2 call? Are there people back at the table that weren't there kind of competing for
deals? Or is it have more people kind of left because of the cost of capital and volatility?
 
Brian Robert Dickman
Getty Realty Corp. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
I would say it's just as competitive as it's ever been.
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) Ladies and gentlemen, there are no further questions in the queue. I will now hand over to Chris Constant for
closing remarks.
 
Christopher J. Constant
Getty Realty Corp. - President, CEO & Director
Great. Thank you, operator, and thank you, everyone, for joining us this morning for our call. We appreciate your interest in the company,
and we look forward to getting back on the phone with you when we report our fourth quarter and year-end results in late February.
 
Operator
Thank you, sir. This concludes today's conference. Thank you for your participation, and you may now disconnect your lines.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
©2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.