CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
Brian Bair
Offerpad Solutions Inc. - Founder, Chairman & CEO
 
Michael S. Burnett
Offerpad Solutions Inc. - CFO
 
Stefanie A. Layton
Offerpad Solutions Inc. - Senior Director of IR
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
Brett Anthony Knoblauch
Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., Research Division - Research Analyst
 
Dae K. Lee
JPMorgan Chase & Co, Research Division - Analyst
 
Jay McCanless
Wedbush Securities Inc., Research Division - SVP of Equity Research
 
Justin Ian Ages
Joh. Berenberg, Gossler & Co. KG, Research Division - Analyst
 
Nicholas Freeman Jones
JMP Securities LLC, Research Division - Director & Equity Research Analyst
 
Ryan John Tomasello
Keefe, Bruyette, & Woods, Inc., Research Division - Analyst
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Good evening. Thank you for attending today's Offerpad Third Quarter 2022 Earnings Call. My name is Megan, and I'll be your moderator
for today's call.
I will now turn the call over to Stefanie Layton, Vice President of Investor Relations and ESG at Offerpad. Stefanie?
 
Stefanie A. Layton
Offerpad Solutions Inc. - Senior Director of IR
Thank you, and good afternoon, everyone. Welcome to Offerpad Solutions' Third Quarter 2022 Earnings Call. Our Chairman and Chief
Executive Officer, Brian Bair; and our Chief Financial Officer, Mike Burnett, are here with me today.
During the call today, management will make forward-looking statements as defined in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of
1995. Forward-looking statements are inherently uncertain and events could differ significantly from management's expectations. Please
refer to the risks, uncertainties and other factors relating to the company's business described in our filings with the U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission. Except as required by applicable law Offerpad, does not intend to update or alter forward-looking statements,
whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
On today's call, management will refer to certain non-GAAP financial measures. These metrics exclude certain items discussed in our
earnings release under the heading non-GAAP financial measures. The reconciliations of Offerpad's non-GAAP measures to the
comparable GAAP measures are available on the financial tables of the third quarter earnings release on Offerpad's website.
I'll now turn the call over to Brian.
 
Brian Bair
Offerpad Solutions Inc. - Founder, Chairman & CEO
Thanks, Stefanie. Hey everyone. I appreciate you joining us today. I'll cover some company highlights, market trends, operational updates
and our focus for the remainder of the year. Mike will share our third quarter 2022 financial results and our fourth quarter expectations.
In the third quarter, we maintained an average time from home acquisition to sell below 100 days, kept inventory aged over 180 days at
5% or 150 homes, earned a 93% customer satisfaction rating, and grew our listing and buyer closings by 100% year-over-year. Given the
macro and real estate market conditions in the third quarter, these accomplishments really speak to the flexibility of our model and the
value our products offer to homeowners.
In the second quarter, we shared that the softening in the real estate market was here. Since then, the economy, consumer sentiment
and the real estate market have changed significantly. And increasingly hawkish Fed, persistent inflation, substantial increases in
mortgage rates, and further escalation of global conflict have put the financial and credit markets on edge. The downstream impact left
residential consumers in a temporary state of shock.
Since we launched in 2015, most of the U.S. has experienced a seller's market, but the value proposition we provide is even stronger in a
buyer's market. When sellers can go from listing to pending in days and it's going to takes weeks or months, iBuying becomes even more
attractive. And if we are smart about how we underwrite homes in the market, there is an opportunity for enormous growth.
But we aren't there yet. Right now, we are in between the seller's market and the buyer's market, and expectations between the 2 parties
are vastly different. Sellers are holding on to the idea their home is still worth what it was 6 months ago, and buyers aren't willing to
engage at those prices. This in-between phase is the most challenging period for the entire real estate market, including iBuyers.
I'd like to discuss today how we have planned for and are navigating this time. Offerpad's core strategy of providing a comprehensive
suite of real estate solutions is more important than ever right now. Because of our diverse product offerings, including our asset-light
listing service, Offerpad has continued to provide customers more certainty and control. In addition, we are continuously innovating to
create new products that can help mitigate many of the challenges homeowners are facing.
For example, in addition to increasing the scope of renovations on certain properties to position our homes to sell first when competing
inventory is present, we are also offering customizable renovation services. We recently started testing our new service called My Way in
our Phoenix market. With My Way, homeowners can select paint, flooring, countertops and appliances from a list of options that match
their own in-personal style.
Updates will be completed before they move in, and the cost of upgrades can be rolled into the mortgage. The breadth and efficiency of
our renovations team is a key differentiator and an important asset as we grow. This offering aligns perfectly with our mission to provide
customers with a more convenient and streamlined homeownership experience.
On the operations side, we continue to adjust as the market evolves. Specifically, we updated our underwriting to account for increased
risk, extended holding times and depreciating prices. In fact, the difference between homes underwritten in the first half of the year
compared to the second half is so distinct that I can tell the date a home was underwritten just by looking at our closing summary sheet.
In the third quarter, we also revised our buy box by applying the purchase price cap we implemented in select markets during the second
quarter to all markets. Instead of turning away customers with homes outside new parameters, we have been offering our listing service.
Leading to our FLEX listing service has allowed Offerpad to continue helping customers through the current market conditions while
lowering the financial risk to the company.
Customers working with one of our local licensed agents can receive free show-ready services, including landscape and cleaning services
in addition to a home improvement advance. Also customers continue to save by bundling a home sale, home purchase and Offerpad
mortgage. Our FLEX listing and buying service has grown from 7% of our transaction volume in the second quarter of 2020 to 29% of our
transaction volume in the third quarter of 2022. With gross margin profile of 31% year-to-date, we expect our listing service will continue
to be an important product supporting our long-term gross margin target.
The ability to use our renovations department as a risk mitigation tool and differentiator along with the ability to grow our asset-light
listing service provides Offerpad the flexibility to navigate through changing market conditions. Our presence in 28 markets across the
country provides another risk mitigation opportunity. While markets like Phoenix, Denver and Las Vegas are still experiencing a rapid and
significant pullback, we are starting to see signs of stabilization in some of the more affordable markets.
By relying on our local experts, we are strategically deploying our capital into locations with more stability and better line of sight while
maintaining a more conservative acquisition approach in markets with higher volatility. The diversification we have today has been
thoughtfully and intentionally established over the last 7 years, supporting the resiliency of our business.
To provide some historical context, in 2016, we were operating in only 4 markets. At that time, our largest market accounted for 84% of
our revenue. In the third quarter 2022, no market accounted for more than 10% of our revenue. This highlights the clear benefit and risk
mitigation that comes from strategic market diversification.
Lastly, we continue to demonstrate a conservative and disciplined approach to managing our expenses. Like many others, we recently
made an adjustment to the size of our internal team to reflect the current state of the market. When conditions change, Offerpad adapts.
We have made some difficult but responsible decisions over the last quarter, and we will continue to adjust as the market evolves. Given
the current macroeconomic environment, we do expect volatility in the real estate market will likely extend beyond the duration of
historical market transition periods. Revolutionizing a $2 trillion industry isn't easy, especially in times like today. Yet the simplified
services we have introduced to the consumer over the past 7 years confirms there is a better way.
The value of Offerpad's brand and the future potential value we can add by encompassing more services are reasons why we expect more
and more people to come to Offerpad first. We are more than just an iBuyer. We are a real estate partner using technology and deep real
estate expertise to serve our customers. I firmly believe technology-enabled solutions that simplify the homeownership experience will
define the future of real estate.
The iBuying industry is in its early days with only 2 major players. The upside potential is tremendous. As it becomes harder for
homeowners to sell and the pain points from the traditional model we service, more sellers will be looking for an easier solution. Being
one of the country's largest homebuyers in what we expect will soon be a strong buyer's market could significantly amplify our
opportunity to grow. As a real estate solution center with cash offers, listing services, mortgage and a leading renovation team, I believe
Offerpad is well positioned to excel.
On that note, I'll turn the call over to Mike.
 
Michael S. Burnett
Offerpad Solutions Inc. - CFO
Thanks, Brian. Despite some of the most challenging conditions in residential real estate, we continue the disciplined execution of our
business strategy. The dramatic drop in demand for housing, driven by affordability issues resulting from the significant rapid rise in
interest rates and elevated home prices was further extended in the third quarter.
Given the expected continuation of these conditions, we are keenly focused on selling our existing inventory that was acquired in the first
half of the year before the disruption in the housing market at the best available price. We are utilizing real-time market data, analytics
and our years of real estate experience with thousands of transactions in our individual markets to do that.
We are making tough decisions in uncertain times with a commitment to aiming for the best outcome given the circumstances. Right
now, that often means accepting losses on homes that we believe may decline further in the short term to be able to conserve or redeploy
that capital more effectively. We are making these decisions on a market-by-market and home-by-home basis to optimize the outcome.
At the same time, we have temporarily but significantly reduced the number of homes we are acquiring during this period of transition.
At times of considerable market dislocation, we narrow our buy box to limit the homes that we are evaluating and adjust the input
variables in our underwriting model to be more conservative. This results in us acquiring fewer homes, but acquiring homes that we feel
will generate the underwritten return in this market.
Though the sample size is small at this point in time, we are seeing positive tangible results from the homes that were acquired after the
change in mortgage rates that have sold in September and October. We believe this process of selling through inventory acquired in the
first half of the year should essentially be completed by the end of the first quarter with the proportion of sales from older inventory
decreasing from Q3 and Q4 into Q1.
This would position us well to capitalize on our strategy for profitable growth in what is expected to be a buyer's market. We continue to
expect an annual contribution margin after interest of 3% to 6% once the market stabilizes and to increase that margin over the longer
term.
Turning now to our Q3 results. In the third quarter, we generated $822 million of revenue, exceeding the top end of our Q3 guidance
range and a 52% increase year-over-year. This increase was supported by the sale of 2,280 homes, reflecting a 36% year-over-year
increase and an average sales price of $357,000 compared to $321,000 in the third quarter of 2021.
We reported third quarter gross profit of $2.2 million, net loss of $80 million and adjusted EBITDA of negative $64.3 million. Each of
these amounts includes a $27.5 million inventory impairment charge. Absent this charge, each of these metrics would have been $27.5
million higher, including adjusted EBITDA, which would have been a negative $36.8 million. Contribution margin after interest for the
quarter was a negative $4,500 per home.
Our focus on selling existing inventory and minimizing our age properties can be seen in our third quarter results. Importantly, as of
September 30, our aged inventory over 180 days was at 5% or 150 homes, nearly half of which were under contract. The total number of
homes in inventory at September 30 was 3,128, a 12% decrease from our June 30 inventory and more than 20% below our summer peak.
This planned reduction in inventory is the result of our primary focus on dispositions and our temporary decrease in acquisitions during
this time of price dislocation.
Our acquisition of 1,847 homes in the third quarter represents a 50% sequential reduction from our Q2 acquisitions this year. And given
the current outlook, we expect that our fourth quarter acquisitions would again be less than half of what we acquired in Q3. Our time to
cash increased to 97 days in the third quarter from 83 days in the second quarter. This marks the ninth consecutive quarter with time to
cash below our 100-day target. However, we do expect to be above this target during periods of slower market conditions.
From a cost management standpoint, we are taking a responsible approach to appropriately size our operations given the current
environment, but also balancing that with our expectation of this slowdown in transactional activity being temporary for us. As a result,
we reduced our operating expenses by 14% in the third quarter compared to the second quarter of 2022. This reflects reductions in
headcount in sales and marketing in addition to an overall emphasis on cost reduction. Lastly, with a continued focus on risk
management and cost efficiency, we ended the quarter with a cash balance at September 30 of $197 million.
Looking forward, in the fourth quarter, we expect to sell between 1,425 and 1,850 homes, generating revenue of between $500 million
and $650 million. We also expect adjusted EBITDA to be between negative $40 million and negative $60 million, reflecting the
continued near-term variability in market conditions.
During Q4, we expect the initial sequential improvement in adjusted EBITDA to begin. By Q1 of 2023, homes that were acquired in the
second half of this year would likely make up the majority of homes sold in the quarter and would, therefore, be expected to further
generate sequentially higher margins and ROI. While many things in the macro environment are uncertain, we do note that the current
state is temporary and that the real estate market will settle.
Right now, we are positioning the company to capitalize on the next wave of opportunities. As the first iBuyer with proven profitability, a
holistic solution center approach, and a highly efficient and value-additive renovations offering, Offerpad has the structure and strategy
to deliver long-term value to both customers and shareholders.
Our platform, products and operations have continuously improved over the years, allowing us to navigate through the current
dislocation with an established mature and stable foundation. We are focused on executing through the immediate challenges while
emphasizing and expanding the products in our portfolio to improve the balance of higher-margin, capital-light offerings and reigniting
growth further into 2023.
I'll now turn the call over to the operator to begin the question-and-answer session.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) Our first question comes from the line of Dae K. Lee with JPMorgan Chase.
 
Dae K. Lee
JPMorgan Chase & Co, Research Division - Analyst
I have 2. So on the first one, you talked about gaining instability in some markets that you operate in. And so what are you seeing in those
markets that's driving that? And how long do you think it take for other markets to kind of see a similar behavior to reach stability?
And then secondly, how far along are you selling the homes acquired before the market conditions deteriorated? And it seems that you
guys are expecting the mix of homes still to shift more towards [linear] homes by 1Q. Is that right? And as the home does remain on your
FLEX, what are some of the reasons those are taken over to sell?
 
Brian Bair
Offerpad Solutions Inc. - Founder, Chairman & CEO
It's Brian. Yes, the -- as far as the market conditions that we're seeing, specifically a lot of it has to do with the affordability. We're seeing
that primarily in the Midwest markets think Indianapolis, Fort Wayne, Columbus, Ohio, those markets where you didn't have the home
price appreciation as you saw in some of the other markets. And so I think affordability is a lot driving that.
You still have less than 1.5 month supply of homes in those markets as well. So that's what we're seeing. As far as when we're going to
see the other markets kind of settle a little bit, I think it's going to be pretty volatile until the end of the year, especially in places like
Phoenix and Denver and some of the really high home price appreciation markets that we saw due to affordability.
I think you're going to see the increased seasonality. But obviously, we're watching that closely. But there's spots in other markets that
we're seeing. But a lot of it has to do with the immediate home price and affordability is what we're focused on.
 
Michael S. Burnett
Offerpad Solutions Inc. - CFO
It's Mike. Just in terms of your second question there on the homes and inventory. What I'd tell you is, generally speaking, I think we will
continue to sell through those in the fourth quarter and Q1. That is our expectation. We are anticipating that based on what we're seeing
in the market in our current pacing that by the end of the first quarter, we should be predominantly through that older inventory;
anything, call it, acquired pre up through July of this year.
So that's driving some of the negative results in the guidance for Q4 because more of the homes that we sell in there will be from that
vintage. As we move into Q1, I think you start to see that weighting shift to some of the newer homes, but will still need to be working
through that at that point in time. But based on what we can see right now, that's our expectation.
 
Brian Bair
Offerpad Solutions Inc. - Founder, Chairman & CEO
Yes. One other thing, Dae, I'll just to add to that is remember what's -- in real estate, a lot of this -- a lot of the data is trailing. And so
what will happen is on the underwritten side, for example, if we underwrite a home and the seller chose to close in 45 or 60 days from
when we underwrote that home originally, and then we have to get that house, put it through renovation, get it on the market. So that's
where and I mentioned this in my remarks before, but when we underwrote that home is the most important part. And what we're seeing,
the stuff that are underwriting, they are just pertinent market conditions, those properties are starting to see -- it's early, but starting to
see good signs of how those homes are performing. It's more about legacy that was -- there were underwritten and they are complete
different market conditions that we're working through right now.
 
Dae K. Lee
JPMorgan Chase & Co, Research Division - Analyst
Just as a quick follow-up with that said, is this safe to say 4Q is going to be the chief quarter of your, I guess, order underwritten homes
being sold and Q2 being second biggest among Q seeing a smaller number of those homes getting sold?
 
Brian Bair
Offerpad Solutions Inc. - Founder, Chairman & CEO
Yes, that is the expectation is that the majority of those will come through in the fourth quarter.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from Ryan Tomasello with Stifel.
 
Ryan John Tomasello
Keefe, Bruyette, & Woods, Inc., Research Division - Analyst
I guess first question on the -- considering the decline in book value this quarter and presumably the pressure that will exist into the --
end of the year, can you talk about your conversations with your financing partners, how you feel about financial covenants? And overall,
I guess, how you're thinking about protecting the capital base to maintain the financing capacity required to scale this business beyond
this market correction that we're going through?
 
Michael S. Burnett
Offerpad Solutions Inc. - CFO
Ryan, it's Mike. Without a doubt now, these periods are when you need to be in regular communication with your financial partners and
your banks and we do that regularly. We've got a great team in the finance treasury group over here. We've got good relationships and
build up a very good working group on the debt capital side of the equation. So we're in close contact with them.
We're proactive in our communications with them and try to give them good visibility because they're critical to our collective success. So
we are in compliance with our covenants. It is something that we've looked at all the terms and conditions there to make sure that we're
abiding by those and in line with those. We ended the quarter with just short of $200 million in cash.
The other thing to consider too is that as we go through now in the end of the year and into the first quarter, our inventory and debt
balances will be coming down as we talked about in our prepared remarks with slowing -- intentionally temporarily slowing the pace of
buying. And so those outstanding amounts come down part and parcel to that as well.
So again, something very critical in terms of partnerships with them, but we've had these relationships in some instances for the past 4
years, we've added to them as we've gone along and they've been good supporters of the company.
 
Ryan John Tomasello
Keefe, Bruyette, & Woods, Inc., Research Division - Analyst
And then on the guidance for 4Q, can you provide some color around what gross and contribution margins you're facing into that
forecast? And then beyond that, how we should think about phasing in a recovery as you work through this inventory into 2023?
And then on the OpEx side, you alluded to some of these -- some workforce reductions there. If you can maybe frame the amount of costs
that you stripped out of the system and how we should be thinking about run rate OpEx following those efficiencies, however you prefer
to define OpEx. I think you mentioned about a 14% reduction quarter-over-quarter.
 
Michael S. Burnett
Offerpad Solutions Inc. - CFO
Yes. Okay. A lot there. So come back to me if I skip over anything. But first, on the contribution margin, we don't specifically guide to that,
but bear in mind that our contribution margin calculation is really aimed at taking into account the total cost of ownership of a particular
home. And so in that calculation, we're aggregating the cost -- the come and go even if it's not in a particular period. So that being said,
we believe that Q4 is probably going to be the bottom trough of contribution margin with Q1 then coming back up in terms of recovery.
On the -- just in terms of the recovery on your question on that, tough to say. I mean we run all sorts of different scenarios under different
ones, under different conditions. And ideally, as we said earlier, if we can get -- move through the legacy inventory and then get
ourselves in a position where we can begin to rebuild back where we're comfortable, add points in buying in 2023, that's the objective.
The timeframe for doing that is really just tough to call at this point.
In terms of the reduction in force, we did go through a process that resulted in reducing our workforce by about 7%. We had earlier and
that was in September. We had earlier in the year put measures in place where we were pausing hiring, tightening the belt on the cost
structure. And so we're actually -- from our peak employment over the summertime, we're actually down about 12% from that peak due
to just hiring pauses and natural attrition in the business, and we'll continue with that through the end of the year here.
So that, I would expect about a $2 million benefit for that this year, and then you can annualize that. That's about a quarter's worth in
2022 for next year.
 
Brian Bair
Offerpad Solutions Inc. - Founder, Chairman & CEO
Right. One thing I'll just add to that is coming back to the third quarter again. What was unique about the third quarter, I said this last
time, is that the market cycle kind of changing, I don't think it was a surprise, it was the speed. And so what we saw in the third quarter,
that's where you're going to see the fourth quarter us moving toward more and more of these homes is that there was a pause as the
buyers who thought they were qualified for a certain amount, mortgage rates increased.
And so there was a shock there. There was basically kind of a log jam in the system of buyers and their ability to move and what was
affordable wasn't affordable. So there was kind of a state of shock that happened there. We're starting -- like I mentioned, we're starting
to see that settle a little bit. And we're looking at our homes weekly and moving through this. And so we've been moving through
inventory at -- and at a pace that feels slow, but obviously in these conditions I'm actually happy with what the team and what we've
been doing moving through the inventory right now.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from Nick Jones with JMP.
 
Nicholas Freeman Jones
JMP Securities LLC, Research Division - Director & Equity Research Analyst
You mentioned earlier on the call kind of an expectation of the volatility will last longer than a typical transition. How are you kind of --
are you able to kind of box that in in kind of what -- how long that might be or how you're thinking about it? Do we kind of need to see
where peak rates go and then do spreads starting to tighten? And then that's when there'll be more kind of confidence in affordability for
home buyers. Can you just kind of on a finer point on that? And then I have a follow-up.
 
Brian Bair
Offerpad Solutions Inc. - Founder, Chairman & CEO
Yes. No, it's -- so what's happened when we talk about volatility, obviously that's a really loose term. What volatility is, it's the -- it's really
the sales price on the selling end of it that's really volatile, because we can buy under any kind of market conditions where the market is
going up or the market is going down and depending on how fast it's going down. What we look for is consistency in that.
So for example, the certain market or a certain segment of home, if it's going down and other downturns have been evolving before, it's
going down 2%, 2.5% a month, we can build that in. Where this has been unique, and when I say the height of volatility is because where
2007 to 2010, it was the opposite problem. Then it was people had no equity in their home. And so people were trying to squeeze out
what they could to pay off their mortgage and move through.
What we're seeing it today is people have so much equity in their home. There are $250,000, $300,000 of equity in a home. And so
what's happened is you're seeing really inconsistent pricing out there from sellers. And so that's what we're watching really closely and
especially the high HPA markets that we're watching closely. So I think with what we're seeing and what we're seeing like I mentioned
some of the Midwest markets overall, obviously affordability is key. We expect there'll be volatility as far as pricing and as far as the
amount of equity that sellers have. And just kind of where that gets a little bit more consistent and people start moving through
inventory a little bit, buyer shock, that kind of what I call it, is getting more consistent on that end.
So I'm anticipating the first part of next year we'll start seeing, depending on what happens with the Fed and we're there, but I think
we're going to start seeing more consistency at least in what we're underwriting, which is the most important factor that we're looking
for, again is just the consistency.
 
Nicholas Freeman Jones
JMP Securities LLC, Research Division - Director & Equity Research Analyst
Got it. That's helpful. And then, Mike could you kind of touch on how you feel about the cash position? I know you spoke to some cost
cuts freezing hiring. It sounds like there's about $8 million in benefit next year we should look for. How do you feel about kind of the cash
position kind of heading into next year to the extent that the macro environment stays challenged maybe a bit longer?
 
Michael S. Burnett
Offerpad Solutions Inc. - CFO
Yes, Nick, it's -- we ended the quarter in a good position there, but obviously as we work through some of these losses in the next quarter,
that's something that we just have to manage closely. But I'll tell you, it's absolutely been a hallmark of the company for the past 6 years.
We've always been very cost conscious. We've been very efficient in how we run the organization. We run very lean and we'll continue to
do that. So it's obviously something that is high on our radar. We'll continue to monitor it and manage the business appropriately.
 
Brian Bair
Offerpad Solutions Inc. - Founder, Chairman & CEO
Nick, the one thing that I'll also add just to that, right now what we are -- we are hyper focused on obviously our current inventory, but
also more of our asset-light products; FLEX, for example. And you're working with our SFR partnerships and not just our disposition
homes, but being able to buy and they'll sell -- buying some of those homes from us as well.
And so as we continue to make it through, again what'll say the volatility, we're also being smart on the way that we're approaching it
from the asset-light side of it as well. And as I mentioned I think even last call, being a solution center is not just to provide more
solutions for the consumer, but it also gives us leverage during times of volatility that we can focus on different products that we can
highlight and roll out to the consumers.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from Justin Ages with Berenberg.
 
Justin Ian Ages
Joh. Berenberg, Gossler & Co. KG, Research Division - Analyst
First, on the renovation, I do think it's a key differentiator. I think you disclosed about 22,000 average cost of renovations, which is up
from where it's historically been. Has that been an impediment to getting homes sold that even though you have to put in a little more
money to make them more attractive, it's making the houses cost more?
 
Brian Bair
Offerpad Solutions Inc. - Founder, Chairman & CEO
Yes, no, it's actually just the opposite. So what we're doing is we're -- when we're underwriting any new inventory we have, we're being
more -- definitely more conscious about how we're underwriting it for the renovations needed for that home. But once we own that home,
we're intentionally increasing the amount of renovations that's needed. As in the supply and demand, in normal times what you want is
you want to -- you can make money through your service fee and by maximizing the price of your home through renovation. In times like
this, what you want to do is you want to make sure that your home sells before the other homes.
And so we've been able to use our renovation teams to add different upgrades like granite and appliances and different things that are
going to make our homes unique in the markets to make sure our homes are prepared to sell first and a good product. So we're
intentionally doing that. With the ability of our renovation, it's -- some of those things are not -- they're leading to a little bit longer
renovation times. But it's very much worth it because it's reducing the time on the market. So -- but right now, that's been our focus.
And to your point earlier, and I've mentioned this for the last 6 years, is when there's a market transition, the importance of renovation
because of everything that we just mentioned, being able to control the renovations, your cost, your efficiency, your timing, and that is
going to be really important. Just again from the supply and demand, we want our homes to sell first.
 
Justin Ian Ages
Joh. Berenberg, Gossler & Co. KG, Research Division - Analyst
All right, that's helpful. And then along those lines with this introduction of My Way, has the response been good? I think you said you
introduced it in October. And has it been well received enough that you're also considering expanding to other markets outside of
Phoenix?
 
Brian Bair
Offerpad Solutions Inc. - Founder, Chairman & CEO
Yes. So I would say it's really early right now. There's 2 things. What I like about My Way, the timing of My Way -- we've been working on
this product for a while. The timing is key because now it's a buyer's market and it's really a buyer's product. So as we renovate an
Offerpad home, we're choosing before the house goes to the markets what we're going to renovate.
But sometimes there's just a personal preference of what someone wants to have in their house and so we're able to do that through My
Way. But for that, the first phase is just the Offerpad product. But the next phase of that will be -- the secondary phase of that is to use it
outside of Offerpad products. So a buyer that our FLEX teams are representing will be able to go in there and customize the house that
they want in a -- kind of a non-Offerpad home.
And so I am very, very bullish on where we're going with My Way. The response, it's one of just an early indicator of customers' favorite
product that we have. They love the ability to choose to finish it on a house like you would in a new home. So they really like that. But we
are hyper focused on rolling that out in our other markets. But it's early, but my plan is to get that rolled out very, very quickly as it's
going to be great timing for buyers in a lot of our other markets.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from the line of Brett Knoblauch with Cantor Fitzgerald.
 
Brett Anthony Knoblauch
Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., Research Division - Research Analyst
I guess my question is rates have continued to go up by, call it, 100 basis points at the end of September. If anything, the pace of home
price decline should theoretically accelerate. I guess what gives you confidence that the homes your purchasing now when prices have
yet to fully adjust to, call it, normal levels won't face the same issues you're currently facing with the older vintage of homes that you
have had at pre-July?
 
Brian Bair
Offerpad Solutions Inc. - Founder, Chairman & CEO
Yes, I agree overall with your overall take. We're obviously extremely focused on that and it's very market specific of what we're doing. So
we're -- the markets that are the most volatile that we're expecting more depreciating prices in we're being extremely careful in those
markets, and you're going to see it with the volume that we buy in those markets, places like Phoenix and Denver, Vegas, those markets.
We are expecting still a good decline in those markets. So we're underwriting those with a decelerator per month and at a very wide
margins. But in areas like the Midwest, like I mentioned before, the Indies and some of the markets up there, Kansas, that you're not
seeing nearly the impact on that you're seeing in some of these other markets. We're getting -- we're buying more homes in those
markets. And so even places like Charlotte and Raleigh are areas.
And so how we prevent that one is, remember, one underwriting other new conditions that we did for some of our old -- that we did with
our older inventory. So we're underwriting with what's more wider margins, more assumptions especially with purchase price and
knowing that that home in a lot of these markets is not going to be worth what it is when we underwrite that. So like I said, in early signs
those markets are performing well.
The other thing that we're doing in the markets that just quite bluntly that we're not wanting to buy a lot of inventory in, we're having --
we're pushing more and more people to use our FLEX where we'll help them market their home for them. We'll even add upgrades and
renovation to their home, but -- and have them -- have us work with them on selling the home in the open market. But that's not
anything that we're going to buy just because of the uncertainty in the market.
I think the other thing I'll just add, this is just more for the area is specifically and what you're seeing in most markets around the country.
The outline areas are the areas that are getting hit the hardest. And so you're seeing much higher depreciation in those or home prices
decline more that -- places at 30, 45 minutes outside the main metros.
So those are -- and then so we're very sensitive about buying in any market anything there. And then also anything next to new
homebuilders, they're very aggressive on what they're doing with their pricing and that. So we're just being very selective of what we're
buying right now and pushing more people to the FLEX products right now, and/or buying it and moving it to a single-family rental
company.
 
Brett Anthony Knoblauch
Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., Research Division - Research Analyst
Okay, that makes sense. And then maybe just a comment. Another, call it, $27.5 million inventory impairment, should we expect that to
moderate or how should we think about that going forward?
 
Michael S. Burnett
Offerpad Solutions Inc. - CFO
So that's always a tough one from a prediction standpoint. What we do at the end of each quarter is go through our existing inventory.
And we have a very thorough process that we involve our local folks all the way down to each of the marketplaces. We run that back up
through our regional operations head to our Chief Real Estate Officer. And so it's a thorough process. It considers the markets, the
homes, the neighborhood specifically, and we mark them to market basically at that point in time.
The inventory balance is expected to be below where we're at now. So between that and the markdowns that we take, I would tell you
sitting here today I would expect lesser of an impact as we go along. And hopefully, we start to see the market settle down a little bit, but
candidly it's impossible to predict at this point.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from Jay McCanless with Wedbush.
 
Jay McCanless
Wedbush Securities Inc., Research Division - SVP of Equity Research
I guess the first one I had, assuming all else equals rates, I guess what is the difference between the top end versus the bottom end of the
home sales guidance you have out there for the fourth quarter? What are some factors that we keep you from getting to the top end?
 
Michael S. Burnett
Offerpad Solutions Inc. - CFO
I think first and foremost, it's really just going to be where -- what the demand characteristics are in each of the markets. And that's really
been the root cause of -- from an affordability standpoint that slowed down the demand prospects. The other thing that we have in our
sights too is that fourth quarter from a seasonality standpoint is usually the most pronounced. And so how typical seasonality comes into
play in an environment like this, I'd say there is some uncertainty there. And so that's why we've put a little bit of a wider range similar to
what we did last quarter to try to account for some of that variability, Jay.
 
Brian Bair
Offerpad Solutions Inc. - Founder, Chairman & CEO
I was just going to say one of the things that we're seeing right now in some of the most volatile markets is you're not -- the nice to moves
are not happening right now. Some of them want to upgrade their home or their kitchen. That's just not happening. The majority of the
transactions are coming from people who need to move, lifestyle, for whatever reason.
And so the transactions that -- you are not to lead to the volatility as well, right? So the transaction volume is the big question mark that
we're seeing and just to Mike's point. So of course, we're watching that closely because that leads into buyer demand of anything that we
buy. So we want to make sure that anything that we acquire, we're able to sell it and buy, renovate and sell it within 100 days, and then
also if not, push it into FLEX.
 
Jay McCanless
Wedbush Securities Inc., Research Division - SVP of Equity Research
Okay. And then assuming that mortgage rates stabilized, have you put any type of expansion plans on hold right now or are you still
looking to possibly enter new markets at some point?
 
Michael S. Burnett
Offerpad Solutions Inc. - CFO
Yes. We still -- we've been on pace the last couple of years of adding about 7 to 8 new markets. I would say right now, we still have that in
our sights next year, but we're going to have to play it by year. It really needs to be something that is geared more towards the second
half of the year first. And then secondly, we would again probably have more of a bias towards in our model, we can open up larger hub
markets and then we can also open up more satellite type markets. And so right now, given circumstances, I would say our position is
we'll push out and see how the first half of the year looks, and then have a little bit more of a bias to some of the satellite or adjacent
markets first.
 
Operator
The question-and-answer session has concluded. I will now turn the call over to Brian Bair, Chairman and CEO, for closing remarks.
 
Brian Bair
Offerpad Solutions Inc. - Founder, Chairman & CEO
The thing I'm most proud of is that over the last 7 years, we have created momentum ensuring real estate will never be the same. We are
being realistic about the world around us, but I believe even more strongly today in our mission and our people. I'm excited to be part of
the solution that can revolutionize a $2 trillion industry. Thank you all for joining us today.
 
Operator
That concludes the Offerpad Third Quarter 2022 Earnings Call. Thank you for your participation. You may now disconnect your line.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
©2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.