CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
Courtney Keating
 
Glenn Darrel Sanford
eXp World Holdings, Inc. - Founder, Chairman, CEO & Treasurer
 
Jeff Whiteside
eXp World Holdings, Inc. - CFO & Chief Collaboration Officer
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
Thomas Cauthorn White
D.A. Davidson & Co., Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
PRESENTATION
 
Courtney Keating
Or Metaverse. My name is Courtney Keating, and I'm the CMO of eXP World Holdings. Dave will begin our earnings fireside chat with
opening comments and conversation between Glenn Sanford, Founder, Chairman and CEO of eXp World Holdings; and Tom White,
Managing Director and Senior Research Analyst from D.A. Davidson.
We are happy to welcome Tom back as our moderator.
Following his initial segment, we will move into a presentation which includes a review of the Q3 2022 and year-to-date 2022 financial
highlights.
 
Unidentified Company Representative
Courtney, you just cut out.
 
Courtney Keating
It looks like I got a bit of an echo give me one moment, please.
As said before, we will return for a continuation of the Q&A before concluding the fireside chat. Let's begin with Dave review of the
forward-looking statements.
There will be a number of forward-looking statements made today that should be considered in conjunction with the cautionary
statements contained in the company's SEC filings. Forward-looking statements are subject to various risks and uncertainties and that
could cause our actual results to differ materially from these statements. Please see our filings with the SEC, including our most recent
filed quarterly report on Form 10-Q and annual report on Form 10-K for a discussion of specific risks that may affect our business
performance and financial condition.
We assume no obligations to update or revise any forward-looking statements or information. As a reminder, today's call is being
recorded, and a replay will also be made available on expworldholdings.com. Now for a few logistics as we look at started. For those of
you joining in the EXPI campus today, steel screens hit the stage zoom button on the right of the chat box.
(Operator Instructions) At this time, I would like to turn the fireside chat over to Glenn our founder to start the earnings conversation in
opening remarks. Over to you, Glenn.
 
Glenn Darrel Sanford
eXp World Holdings, Inc. - Founder, Chairman, CEO & Treasurer
Thanks, Courtney, and welcome, Tom. And I'm hearing some audio on a microphone. Okay. No, that's clear. So yes. So Tom, obviously,
you've been covering us for quite some time, and I'm sure you've got some questions to kick things off, but obviously had a great quarter
considering what's going on in the economy, but I'll turn it over to you to kind of ask some questions.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Thomas Cauthorn White
D.A. Davidson & Co., Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
Great. Terrific. Thanks, Glenn. Thanks, Courtney, and Jeff and the rest of the team for asking me to host this quarter. I appreciate it. Yes,
Glenn, a lot of stuff to talk about looking forward to digging into it. Maybe just to kick things off sort of a high level here.
Maybe just touch on maybe your highlights from the third quarter performance.
 
Glenn Darrel Sanford
eXp World Holdings, Inc. - Founder, Chairman, CEO & Treasurer
Yes. So we've been -- we're talking a little bit about what we were expecting in Q3, Q4, even at the beginning of the year as rates were
going up and the Fed was raising rates. And sure enough, we have not been immune to what has been taking place I think later on today,
we're going to have another announcement as to what the Fed is going to do relative to interest rates, and there's some expectations
around what that's going to be and higher interest rates are a big indicator of buyers' ability to buy at current prices based on the fact
that 70 or so percent of buyers use a mortgage to purchase a property.
So with that, there's been a slowdown in the market attrition and with that, we've also started to see what we'll call market attrition in
that agents are in this mode of either not renewing or not getting licensed in to begin with in the industry itself. So we're actually making
a little bit of a shift.
We've talked about it for a while, which is that when the market does shift, we expect to pick up (inaudible) of Brendan Bechard
(technical difficulty) a much more robust space to impact a large number of lives. But with that, we think there's a lot of opportunities for
growth. Then we'll go to the next slide here. We think about the idea that when we -- just in the coaching space, just use that, we think
about that as being a business that will be in the $50 million to $100 million a year range over time.
And it will take multiple years to get there, but it is something that we're focused on really building that out. We've recently did a
partnership with a company called Aden Academy and working to do a sales mastery event in early January. And we have some big plans
of how we can bring them into the fold and some capacity to build out the real estate vertical of coaching and training with a high-value
coaching offering.
And then we're building all the other coaching and other offerings in that space. So when we think about building out all of these things,
you see revenues, that's actually our holding organization for all of our sort of referral-based opportunities that's lit up by Leo Perea and
also the EXP solutions as a number -- as a big marketplace. That's also part of that same network that Leo is overseeing.
There's a lot of opportunities for leads for agents, but also then monetizing those leads and then turning those in to more revenue
opportunities for the company. And in some cases, the agents themselves based on what we're able to do. In some countries, we actually
have a lot of ability to create aligned interest with our agents in the U.S.
It's a little bit tougher to do affiliate services, mainly just because of sort of the way the RESPA laws work, but we're still working on
building a really cool platform for them. We also launched just EXPCON. In October, we announced our eXp luxury initiative. And so
we've got some luxury branding and (inaudible) for actually really helping agents market at a high level. We announced our referral
division and already talked a little bit about success coaching.
But one of the other pieces that we also launched in success was a -- is an initiative around success health, and that's around biohacking,
biometrics, wearables and we've already formed our first partnership with a company called Biome. That's going really well. And we're
going to form some other partnerships with other large organizations to really bring a health and challenge based health metrics to
organizations, not just our EXP and success community but other organizations as well.
So we're excited about a lot of the various aspects of those businesses that we're going to be able to continue to scale with. We also just
-- and this is literally was over the last week or so, we just launched our first discord community for success. And so if anybody listening
to this call is interested in what that community is participating in some capacity, feel free to e-mail me at glenn@success.com, with the
subject line discord we'll definitely get you an invite into that community, can check it out, become part of it.
One thing that we've had is we've had questions come up quite a bit around our agent attrition by levels. And so this is a subject that
when we talk to investors, we talked to -- we go -- I think you even asked quite often the same question. We've actually started to break
this out. And in -- we've said anecdotally that we believe that at the agents that we're churning off of our platform, somewhere around
80% of our agents that were churning off were in that 0 to 2 agent category.
It turns out we were pretty close, 77.1% of the agents that are actually churning out of EXP. So agents that are leaving EXP. In most
cases, they're leaving the industry. But that's where -- most of our churn is we've also broken out. Some of the other levels, just so you
can see what percentage of our churn is happening.
And then we've done some additional metrics in the background, but we're our lowest producing agents are churning off based on the
population of those agents. They're churning of 4.5x as much as our highest producing agents. And so that is all in line based on
production levels, the higher production you are in the EXP ecosystem, the more sticky that we are as an organization.
One of the other metrics that we're going to break out in future time periods as well is attrition based on amount of time on the platform.
And we believe that, that's actually, again, correlated to production levels. The higher your production, the more likely you're going to
stay. I think that's kind of shown a little bit in this in some of my commentary, we're going to start to break that out relative to how long
have you been on the platform before you churn out.
And we think that that's going to be another metric that's going to be interesting to investors. I certainly I'm looking forward to sharing
more of that data because I think it will just show how sticky the EXP platform is based on different production levels. So with that, I'll
turn it back over to you, Tom, to ask any other questions you have.
 
Thomas Cauthorn White
D.A. Davidson & Co., Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
Great. Thanks for that, Glenn, and interesting new disclosures there that look forward to looking at those more closely. I know Jeff is
going to talk a little bit about kind of the financial performance in the quarter, but you guys did release third quarter results this morning.
Maybe just briefly, I would be curious to hear were there any I guess how do the key kind of financial metrics and operational metrics that
you follow, how did they kind of match up to your -- maybe to your expectations heading into the quarter for the last 3 months?
 
Glenn Darrel Sanford
eXp World Holdings, Inc. - Founder, Chairman, CEO & Treasurer
Yes. I think Jeff will definitely talk to a bit of this. I mean one of the things that we've -- it's a little bit different than say, Q2 of 2020, we
saw that massive slowdown because of the sort of what we call it the COVID pause. And we didn't know how bad it was going to be. And
we -- so we literally cut a significant portion of our staff.
And then we came out of that and literally then Q3, Q4 was really busy all the way through really Q1 -- beginning of Q1 of this year. So we
had this really significant ramp. We knew that as interest rates were going up, that we were going to need to halt hiring and then
potentially shift the way that we work with our head count to make up more of that variable-based elements.
But it wasn't -- we have didn't approach it the same way that we did in 2020. So I think one of the things that we're looking at is how do
we moderate our expense load to match up with our transaction mode. Because the way I think about it is that we -- once we get to sort
of this next level of where the market sort of bottoms out at, we become, again, a fairly profitable organization as a company because we
are able to shift our resources in such a way that we should be able to be profitable in good markets and bad markets.
And of course, we're in the shift that will be in for another couple few quarters before we get to what we'll call that flattened level. But
once we hit that, then I think we're going to look really good just in terms of the way that we're structured as an organization. I hope that
helps a little bit there.
 
Thomas Cauthorn White
D.A. Davidson & Co., Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
Yes. No, it does. Thank you. So you referenced that, obviously, what's kind of happening in the broader housing market here and the
agents on your platform are going to have kind of a different next few quarters than they've had the last kind of 4 to 8 quarters or so.
I wanted to talk a little bit about what you guys are doing to help your agents kind of weather this slowdown, be it new products, new
resources. We're a few weeks off of the ESP Con event. You guys announced a flurry of new things, revenues, referral division, luxury,
maybe it seems like those are all about kind of trying to give agents new tools, new ways to succeed in kind of a tough housing market.
Maybe just talk a little bit about which of those you're sort of most excited about? And is it about kind of outright revenue contribution
from these things? Is it more about agent retention or agent or traction -- maybe just walk through that a bit.
 
Glenn Darrel Sanford
eXp World Holdings, Inc. - Founder, Chairman, CEO & Treasurer
Yes. So well, there's -- we focus on all of those things in various different initiatives. But one of them that we announced was around our
new referral division. So that's the ability for an agent, and they're really going to be that low producing agent that is looking at, say,
2023 saying, hey, the market is going to be really slow. I've got to pay real or dues. I have to pay for MLS does. I've got to pay for a bunch
of stock just to be in the business.
And so we've got a referral division where if they're not going to be actively showing or listing property, they can actually hang their
license there and actually reduce their fee exposure quite a bit and simply refer out transactions. So it gives them a place to hang their
license during the slower periods if certainly, if they've been here for a period of time and they built a revenue share organization up, that
would be maybe a place for some of them to move their license as well.
So that, I think, is one of the ways that we're working on the retention front. The other retention pieces is really growth-oriented is we
believe that agents through training, coaching and just getting the basics of the business, blocking and tackling down that they're going
to be more successful.
And so we provide 70, 80 hours a week of training in our campuses. We've got these now partnerships with companies like Agent
Academy, where for a very low dollar amount, I think it's $350 an agent can actually go to a 3-day super-intensive training platform, and
they do that in person. The next one that we're involved in is in January in Fort Lauderdale but they're going to be able to really get in that
environment to help them take their business to the next level, even though the market is slowing those who can figure out ways to drum
up business are going to do fine.
And so that I'm excited about. So those are a couple of them. Certainly, the things we're doing with zoocasa, lead Gen in Canada, we're
doing that across Canada. And then also, we're looking at how do we create more opportunities in the U.S. I know that underneath the
revenues and some of our other opportunities that are coming from that, there's going to be different things that even are going to get
exposed to because we're one large brokerage, one large platform that some of these national players can just tie into.
They don't need to negotiate with all kinds of franchises to get their business into the hands of active agents. So we're excited about all of
that.
 
Thomas Cauthorn White
D.A. Davidson & Co., Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
That's great. I think now maybe, Jeff, if you're ready, it might be a good time for you to walk through your content.
 
Jeff Whiteside
eXp World Holdings, Inc. - CFO & Chief Collaboration Officer
Absolutely. So thank you, Glenn. Thank you, Tom, and good morning, all, and thank you for joining our third quarter 2022 virtual fireside
chat. On behalf of our agents, units and staff team, I'm proud to share our third quarter results and highlights with you today.
As we look at the first page summary, EXP delivered a solid third quarter with record revenue. Continued growth in age count, as Glenn
mentioned, transaction volume and gross margin, and we continue to have very positive cash flow throughout the business. eXp Realty
continues to grow market share with sustainable operating model and positive cash flow. Board of Directors voted to $0.045 per share
Q4 dividend and as Glenn mentioned before, we've successfully navigated numerous cycles in the economy in challenging markets.
And as you can see from the results in the third quarter, we have done that again. We continue to have 0 debt on our balance sheet, a
variable cost structure and our organic growth model that has provided resilience as we move into the future here. And one thing I
wanted to clear up was that as we previously communicated, we entered 2022 after a very strong 2021 with annual SG&A plan of about
$400 million for the year, all right?
And this -- and what we've done in the past is we've supported -- we've actually hired ahead of the curve supporting the anticipated
growth, and that's kind of where that $400 million plan came from. And as we saw the indication in Q1 pointed towards a weaker
economy in the second half of 2022 we reduced our plan to about $360 million. So we took about $40 million of our annual SG&A plan.
And as part of that $40 million annual reduction we did adjust in Q3, our cost structure, resulting in about $20 million in annual savings.
So you're going to see a little bit of that in Q4, but you're actually going to see that as we move into 2023. And assuming negative
industry growth rates in the short term, we're targeting a run rate of about $80 million in SG&A per quarter as we move into 2023.
So if we turn to the next page, at a highlight level, and starting with revenue in Q3, our revenue was $1.2 billion, up 12% versus Q3 of
2021. Our gross profit in Q3 was $93.1 million, up 17% versus Q3 in 2022. Net income was $4.4 million, and that was down year-over-year
versus 2021, and that primarily driven by lower operating margin and lower tax benefits versus Q3 of 2021.
In Q3, our diluted earnings per share was $0.03 and our adjusted EBITDA, a metric we use to -- that includes -- excludes noncash
charges, i.e., stock compensation, was $12.3 million. So if we -- and finally on this page, looking at our Q3 operating cash flow. Our cash
flow was $64.1 million, an increase of 16% versus Q3 2021. Now I look at our key metrics on Chart 3. Our key metrics, as we've discussed
before, broken down into 2 categories: operating metrics and financial metrics.
Looking at our operating metrics, agent NPS was 71%, and our employee NPS was 72%, both scores above our goal of 70 as a
world-class NPS score. In our Realty business, which continues to be the primary driver of financial results, adding productive agents to
our platform drives unit sales, volume, revenue, gross margin dollars that we invest in our business utilized to support our agents, staff
and return to our shareholders.
Our agent count at the end of Q3 was 84,911, up 30% versus this time last year. In terms of unit sales, we transacted 138,354 units in Q3,
up 6% from this time last year. Our average price per unit was up 2% versus 2021. Our volume was $50.4 billion for $46.6 billion, up 6%
-- I'm sorry, 8% versus Q3 2021. And now as we look at our financial metrics, we've highlighted revenue, gross margin dollars, net
income, adjusted EBITDA and operating cash flow on our previous page.
Other financial metrics include gross margin percentage which was 7.5% or 7.2% in Q3 2021. That was up 5% year-over-year. Our SG&A
increased from $68.4 million to 93.1% driven by higher personnel-related expenses, technology and growth investments. This quarter
also contained severance costs of about $2 million related to the actions we discussed on Page 1.
Our operating income was $26,000 versus $11.2 million in Q3, driven primarily by increased SG&A and investments. And finally, on our
key metrics results, our cash balance in Q3 2022 and was $134.5 million versus $98.1 million in 2021, and that's an increase of 37%. If we
look at chart 4, some additional Q3 2022 milestones, EXPI achieved positive GAAP net income for the 12th quarter in a row. We
continued positive accumulated earnings and shareholder equity.
We paid our fifth cash dividend in Q3 of 2022 and declared a dividend for Q4 in 2022. I mentioned the $0.045 per share that was
approved by our Board of Directors. To be paid on November 28 to shareholders of record on November 14. And then again, we continue
to offset dilution via our share buyback and we spent about $60 million in common stock.
In Q3, top a dilution of our agents, and we returned about $7 million to shareholders in the form of dividends in Q3 of 2022. So if we go --
if we take a quick look at our year-to-date numbers, agents, basically, we talked about that already. Our units on a year-to-date basis,
are 402,961, and that's up 26% year-over-year.
Our volume was 149.7 versus 11.2%, up 35% and Revenue growth on a year-to-date basis was 36%. We're coming in at almost $3.7 billion
in revenue year-to-date. Our gross margin was 283.8 up 33% and gross margin percentages based on a pretty strong first half of the year
are at 7.7% versus 7.9% of last year. SG&A, as I talked about before, has increased year-over-year to the tune of 48%.
Our operating income of $16.1 million versus $32.6 million was down 51% year-over-year. EBITDA $57 million versus $64.9 million, down
12%, and our operating cash flow was $203.5 million versus 16.8%, up 30%. And finally, our cash and cash equivalents, the amount of
money we have in the bank was $134.5 million versus 98.1%. So the cash -- our cash balance is up 37% year-over-year.
So if we look at the next chart, Chart 6, I'm going to take a quick look at our historical growth in agents and revenue from 2018 through
Q3 2022. We have grown from $500 million in revenue in 2018 with 15,000 agents, $3.7 billion in revenue year-to-date 2022 with plus
85,000 agents and as Glenn mentioned, as we started the conversation today, although there will clearly be challenges in our economy
in the short term, we believe we have a long road of material growth opportunities ahead of us at EXPI and remain confident in our ability
to gain market share over the long term. Thank you for your time, and I will pass it back to Tom and Glenn for some Q&A.
 
Thomas Cauthorn White
D.A. Davidson & Co., Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
Great. Thanks, Jeff. That was great. A lot of detail in there. Maybe just to kick things off, Jeff, I guess just from your seat as the CFO and
kind of looking at all the financial metrics and data, like what are the 1 or 2 things that maybe stood out to you the most in terms of the
performance of the company in the quarter?
 
Jeff Whiteside
eXp World Holdings, Inc. - CFO & Chief Collaboration Officer
Yes. I think the thing that stood out to me the most time was the -- basically the continuation and the success of our organic growth
model. I mean the events, including EXPCON that you mentioned before, the agent events that we're having across the country and
across the world. So I think that's -- we've got to a level where this organic growth model just keeps going day after day, week after week,
quarter after quarter.
So I think that's the highlight. And I think that, that's going to be the major competitive advantage that's going to get us across --
through these times and really shine as the economy picks up again.
 
Thomas Cauthorn White
D.A. Davidson & Co., Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
Great. And then circling back on the commentary on operating expenses. Thank you for clarifying that and sort of what the new run rate
is. I think investors have been focused on the trends there. Can you maybe just talk a little bit about where are the areas where you're
either making cuts or driving big efficiencies?
And how much more room potentially do you have to further drive efficiencies in operating expenses. Let's say, if the housing market
takes another leg down or is softer for even a longer period of time than maybe folks think?
 
Jeff Whiteside
eXp World Holdings, Inc. - CFO & Chief Collaboration Officer
Yes. I mean first of all, we're decreasing our spend across all the areas of the business where we have increased capacity and growth. So
as I mentioned before time, historically, we've hired ahead of the curve and we invested ahead of the curve from a capacity standpoint for
the Realty business.
So we stopped doing that in Q1 of this year, all right? So there's opportunity in that area and that's where a lot of the current savings is
going to come from -- we're also looking around our business as we do on a continual basis and look at our business units to see what
makes sense from an investment standpoint and what's changing, right, and shifting resources I think that there's a tremendous amount
of opportunity for us from a productivity standpoint.
And Patrick and the brokerage team is making huge strides that I think we're going to see in the first part -- the first half of next year. So I
think there's opportunity there. And if the volume of the industry continues to decline the way it's predicted as we sit here today. I mean
we do have the ability to decrease our cost structure to reflect and to match that volume that's in the industry.
 
Thomas Cauthorn White
D.A. Davidson & Co., Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
Great. That's helpful. Maybe moving up the income statement a little bit. Gross margins, I noticed that they were up a few hundred basis
points on a year-over-year basis. Can you maybe just talk a little bit about -- obviously, there are a bunch of different things that can
impact gross margin.
But in the third quarter and over the next few quarters, what are the main kind of drivers that are going to move gross margins around?
And can we anticipate that we're going to see kind of further gross margin expansion here over the next few quarters?
 
Jeff Whiteside
eXp World Holdings, Inc. - CFO & Chief Collaboration Officer
Yes. I think what we're going to see is as volumes go down, the actual gross margin percentage, as you saw in the quarter actually goes
up, right? And what we focus on is the dollars. But to answer your specific question on the percentage is, I mean, we do believe that's
going to go up towards about an 8% range.
And that's -- the function is -- it's the volume, it's capping and it's price. So as volume comes down, price comes down, the percentages
actually go up. So we do see that going towards about 8% in the near term.
 
Thomas Cauthorn White
D.A. Davidson & Co., Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
Okay. I guess maybe last one for you, Jeff, and then we can open it up and get Glenn back. But I guess as you -- outside of operating
expenses, which you kind of touched on, I mean, when you think about how to manage the business through a challenging housing
market, what are you kind of most focused on from a financial perspective?
 
Jeff Whiteside
eXp World Holdings, Inc. - CFO & Chief Collaboration Officer
Yes. So we're focused on making sure we're matching our capacity from a cost standpoint with what volumes coming through the front
door. And we're also, at the same time, looking for other opportunities from a revenue standpoint. Glenn mentioned, there's a lot of
things around affiliated services.
I know we've talked about that for years. but we're actually -- we have very specific programs to increase our operating margin via
affiliated services. We're looking at huge productivity opportunities across our business on the brokerage side. And then at the same
time, we're looking at -- as we hit an environment, if it's as down as people predict it could be, I mean we just got to look at our business
differently and things that we were able to put into our cost structure before we might not be able to put in our cost structure in that
environment.
So we do have the opportunity to decrease cost structure time. And I think we have the opportunity to increase margin through other
sources and then gain that productivity.
 
Thomas Cauthorn White
D.A. Davidson & Co., Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
Great. Yes, maybe we'll bring Glenn in here to join us again. Good segue there, Jeff, as far as touching on affiliated services, wanted to
maybe just get an update from you guys. Where do things stand right now as it relates to kind of the key affiliated services that you guys
are investing in and are focused on.
And when can investors maybe look forward to those having a more appreciable impact on the income statement.
 
Glenn Darrel Sanford
eXp World Holdings, Inc. - Founder, Chairman, CEO & Treasurer
One that we've been investing in now for over a year is the success lending joint venture. That one -- we actually are -- it's an interesting
one to be investing in, in a slowing, especially dramatically slow mortgage market. The nice thing about where we're at is that we're
continuing to grow success lending, whereas almost everybody who has established are shrinking their lending platform.
So we're actually in a really interesting place to be able to actually attract productive loan officers on the platform. It doesn't mean that
we're profitable in that segment yet. I think we're actually investing in other -- I think there was a little bit of a cash call, just a small one,
about $0.5 million and I think it's our first cash call in that, but it's just because the market has slowed more dramatically than we had
anticipated when we launched this in 2021 and so that's -- but where we're optimistic around it is that we're getting a lot of really good
loan officers in the seats geographically distributed around the country and then creating opportunities to get them loan business, but
we're in this, we'll call it a little bit of a slowdown pause over time the rates go up, we see mortgage applications decline -- and we've
seen that happen 5 times so far this year.
I think today's announcement, we'll make it the sixth. And so that has definitely dampened that. So I think we're looking at is we are in a
market that's dramatically slowing and -- but we're able to -- because we're actually forming these businesses in a down market, we're
actually better positioned to build out the infrastructure or when the market gets back to normal, we're -- I actually think we're growing it
at exactly the right time because it's actually tougher to grow in some respects in an upmarket because loan officers, they're doing a lot
of business.
And now they're actually looking for where is the opportunity. And so that specific JV actually is a pretty good one. And then we're just
continuing to work on the other initiatives, mortgage or title and Escrow, we're looking at Escrow opportunities in California. We're
looking at title and Escrow opportunities across the U.S. And we're going to have some things to announce probably early in the year
around some of that stuff that we'll be excited to share.
 
Jeff Whiteside
eXp World Holdings, Inc. - CFO & Chief Collaboration Officer
Yes. Tom, I'd add that from an operating margin standpoint, I think in the second half of next year, we'll be able to point to a number of
successful programs that the team is working on very hard right now. And I think they're going to start becoming material in the second
half of next year.
 
Thomas Cauthorn White
D.A. Davidson & Co., Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
Okay. That's great. I guess you can consider it an affiliated services, but I wanted to double click on the success brand and specifically
kind of the coaching and training part of it. And Glenn, I think you mentioned a little bit earlier in your prepared remarks that you guys
thought this could be kind of a $50 million to $100 million business in a few years.
Can you just talk a little bit about like how it gets there, like the building blocks of that?
 
Glenn Darrel Sanford
eXp World Holdings, Inc. - Founder, Chairman, CEO & Treasurer
Yes, for sure. We've been evaluating. We just finished a meet up of some of the folks involved at success Jairek Robins, Marcus marcus
Truman, our head coach Courtney is also the Chief Operating Officer over on the success side as well. So we're working diligently on this.
But we were looking at where is a lot of our traction and our success coaching certification program is something that's getting a ton of
traction.
We actually are booked out until February, March or coaches wanting to get certified because the -- and it's the brand and the history of
the brand that makes it so compelling to become a success certified coach. We currently are certifying 30 coaches a month through that
and they're investing between $5,000 and $6,000 to go through the coaching certification.
We believe that sometime in 2023, we're going to be able to increase the number of coaches getting certified to closer to 100 to 150
coaches a month going through coaching certification and then we have on the backside, the revenues from delivering actual coaching
through relationships that the coaches generate or relationships that success generates. And so there will be -- for those who are on the
success coaching team, which is different than the certification, but they're actually on the team that should be a pretty significant
revenue stream as well.
Then we've got partnerships that we currently have like on the Agent Academy, where there'll be some revenue or profit sharing that
comes from some of those activities, and we're still in the throes of figuring out what that looks like. And then we're starting to have
partnership conversations with other companies. We had a conversation here recently their organization with over 400,000 members in
their community that they're looking to outsource some coaching, group coaching to success. To help coach members of their
organization.
And so we're -- that opportunity might be a little bit too big for us to completely match today but we believe that there's lots of those
opportunities that we'll be able to go in with build a coaching curriculum training relative to the goals that, that organization has and be
able to bring a number of already pre-vetted success certified coaches to that. So the coaching piece, we think, is just the certification
process is a multimillion dollar year enterprise and then the coaching beyond that is, again, a large enterprise.
We're just in the early stages of this. It's been -- we've been working on it now for less than a year. Marcus Truman, our head coach just
joined us 6 months ago. We're now putting in a lot of the scaling infrastructure that will be pretty meaningful over time.
 
Thomas Cauthorn White
D.A. Davidson & Co., Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
Okay. That's helpful. A few more minutes here, and maybe we can talk about agents a little bit more. And at EXPCON at the investor
meeting there, you guys sounded pretty confident that you expect to be able to kind of continue to grow agent count kind of through this
year and presumably kind of into next regardless of kind of what the market is doing.
Can you maybe just -- it's only -- I guess it's only been a couple of weeks since then, but it's rapidly evolving backdrop here. Maybe just
kind of give us an update on how things are going on the agent count side of things? And are you still confident there? And maybe just to
touch on like NPS, like how do you kind of see agent NPS holding up in a slower market?
 
Glenn Darrel Sanford
eXp World Holdings, Inc. - Founder, Chairman, CEO & Treasurer
Yes. So one thing to note is our NPS was actually up versus Q3 last year. So I think we're 71% versus 69% on our NPS. And the way we
look at NPS is we think about the idea that if we're over 70%, we're really in a good place, NPS wise. It's not a number that normally, you
can get to 100%.
But our NPS and then our employee NPS combined has resulted in us being, I think, the #4 employer as recognized by Glassdoor or best
places to work. And so our focus on building the most agent-centric real estate brokers on the planet and truly doing that, like not just
being a phrase that we use for marketing purposes, but we actually iterate around that yields a high NPS score, which results in agents
wanting to be with us.
And what we're having right now as we're having this large amount of churn, especially in that low production category of agents, but
we're also starting to really see agents that are higher producing taking a serious look at EXP, and they could be doing 4, 5, $800 million
a year of historical production, say, 2021, 2022 might be down for them, too.
In a lot of cases, they're down 20%, 30% in terms of their team volume. But we're really a place that a lot of these people are moving to
because of that sort of focus on that. If our NPS numbers are below 60 and where in any category and so that could be onboarding. It
could be transaction services.
It could be support, it could be whatever it is. In those areas, we bring sort of all hands on deck kind of approach to that because we know
how critical NPS is, and that's our way of understanding where are the pain points in the organization. So when we think about the
number of agents that we'll have towards the end of the year, I mean, we're in November we're 85,000 going on about 86,000 agents.
And we look at that, that takes us off of our original projected pace of going over 100,000 by the end of the year and puts us in a position
where we're now looking at 87,000, 88,000, 89,000 agents toward the end of the year.
So that's kind of where we're trending at the moment. We like to be very transparent with our numbers. That's why we put in every -- on
the bottom of every one our press releases, our agent count because it allows you to just see what's going on in terms of moderated
growth rate and you can get -- if you want to build a chart out as an investor, you can easily sort of look at what that looks like.
And you can see that where our growth rate right now is moderated from an agent count perspective. But we think that that's why we're
shifting to market share in the short run while market does this thing because we know we're picking up market share even if our agent
counts isn't going up dramatically.
 
Thomas Cauthorn White
D.A. Davidson & Co., Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
Okay. That's helpful. Maybe I just -- you guys shared the new disclosures around attrition and of the folks that attrit kind of breaking it
out by productivity level. Glenn or Jeff, can you maybe just give us a little bit of a sense, there are some quarters, I think, that you guys in
your slides show gross ads and net ads.
Just trying to get a sense of like I guess just that dynamic, how is like gross attraction going and relative to attrition?
 
Jeff Whiteside
eXp World Holdings, Inc. - CFO & Chief Collaboration Officer
Yes. So the gross -- the additions are relatively strong compared to other quarters, although there's a lot less people entering the
industry right now. What's happening what we're seeing, Tom, though, is there's more people leaving the industry.
And I think that's where we're going to see when we see NAR data that comes out. So the what's happened from a trending standpoint is
our additions has gone down slightly, but they're still relatively strong. From a growth standpoint, the terminations have gone up over
the last quarter, 2 quarters as people exit the industry.
 
Thomas Cauthorn White
D.A. Davidson & Co., Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
Okay. That's great. And then maybe just last one from my side here. Talk a little bit about kind of teams and independent brokerages. It
seems like that might be a fertile kind of hunting ground, if you will, specifically these independent brokerages that have significant
overhead, presumably are on kind of like a legacy type business model and are going to maybe struggle when volumes decline, like how
do you guys make sure that you make the most of the opportunity to go after those maybe kind of vulnerable teams and try and get them
to port over.
Like what's the I mean the pitch to the agents would seem super compelling, what's the pitch to like the brokerage owner? And how do
you make sure you make the most of the opportunity there?
 
Glenn Darrel Sanford
eXp World Holdings, Inc. - Founder, Chairman, CEO & Treasurer
Well, our basic pitch is that they can -- if they convert their brokerage over to EXP that in most cases, they'll actually net more in moving
their brokerage to EXP than they do running their own brokerage. And we look at it based on the economics of a brokerage, you've got
your fixed bricks-and-mortar expenses, and then you've got your staffing expenses to support that.
And if you're not -- if you're a small brokerage spreading those expenses over your agent count most small brokerages. And actually, a
lot of even midsized and larger brokerages, they're right now losing money. And so if they have an opportunity to get out from
underneath their leases and move their agents to EXP, they'll immediately go from losing money to actually making money.
And then the upside around our aligned compensation model, helping EXP grow allows them to still have the upside in some cases, in
most cases, more upside growing EXP than they did running their individual office or brokers. So that's really the piece and they're
hurting right now. We're going into -- we're in November, December and January, and those brokerages will be feeling a lot of pressure
financially, I suspect that we're going to see a number of broker owners and we saw this in the 2008, 2009 period 2007, where we're
going to see a lot of broker owners that, unfortunately, will have to declare bankruptcy just because the economy from their perspective
and the way that they run their brokerage and no fault to them it just is the economics for them do not work in a down market, and that's
where we find ourselves. So they're going to be looking for a home.
So it's really trying to meet them where they're at, help them with a soft on-ramp onto the EXP platform and then help them -- help their
agents actually create a different type of career path than they had in the brokerage model that they had previously. And so that's really
the pitch and the conversations. And then when we think about large teams, obviously, I think there they're looking at their influence
having built large, credible real estate teams that, in some cases, are known throughout the country as being highly productive agents
and teams.
And so they're able to then leverage their personas in the industry to actually grow a network of agents through the country. And so for
them, it becomes an additional revenue stream to their already reasonably, if not very successful real estate practice.
 
Thomas Cauthorn White
D.A. Davidson & Co., Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
That's great. We're running short on time here, but we did get some questions from the audience that maybe we can do just a quick little
speed around here, Glenn and Jeff. First one is, can you explain why net income went from $23.8 million last year to $4.4 million is the
first one. Second is an update on international agent count -- what's the latest there? And then someone asking Glenn, why the recent
stock sales on your part?
 
Glenn Darrel Sanford
eXp World Holdings, Inc. - Founder, Chairman, CEO & Treasurer
Yes. So I can take the first one. So basically, there's 2 drivers to the lower net income year-over-year. One is in our investment from an
SG&A standpoint was higher this year. And then another big deal is that we've had -- we have lower tax benefits this year based on the
deductions that we can take. So it's -- two drivers time. One is the lower operating margin based on higher investments and the second
one is lower tax benefits year-over-year, both in Q3 and on a year-to-date basis.
 
Jeff Whiteside
eXp World Holdings, Inc. - CFO & Chief Collaboration Officer
Yes. And I'll take the other 2 there. The -- and obviously, you know this, but I had expiring options that expired at the end of the end of
September of 2022. And so that was the last stock sales was to make sure that I made it into -- before my options actually expire. And
currently, I have no plans in place to sell more shares. So those were -- that was in conjunction with my stock options that were set in
2012.
So that was that. And that was actually -- if you look at my sales, I believe, 100% of the sales that took place in 2022 were all related to
expiring stock options. And then the other piece was around international agent count. Our U.S. agent count, I think we looked at it was
Year-over-year, it's about 23% growth and our agent base over the Q3 to Q3 was 30%.
The balance of that was international agent growth. And so that was a combination of Canada and other markets. So we're now in excess
of 10,000 or 11,000 maybe 12,000 agents internationally, including Canada. So that's -- that is the fastest-growing part of our
organization. I believe it's well in excess of 100% year-over-year growth rate as a category. And so we expect that international is going to
be a significant growth area for the company as we grow new markets.
So we've talked about in the past, but we've been the fastest-growing brokerage and the U.K., South Africa, India, actually, most of the
markets that we go into, Mexico. Most of those markets that we go into, we become fairly quickly the fastest-growing brand in the
country. We're already in, I think, the top 12 or 13 estate agencies in South Africa now and by brands.
And we're seeing us grow into fairly large sizes fairly quickly. So that's been an exciting growth piece of the model.
 
Thomas Cauthorn White
D.A. Davidson & Co., Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
Terrific. I think we've used the full 60 minutes here. I just want to thank you again for giving the opportunity to host. I really appreciate
the discussion. I will -- I'll pass it back to you guys for any closing comments.
 
Jeff Whiteside
eXp World Holdings, Inc. - CFO & Chief Collaboration Officer
Thank you very much, Tom. Really appreciate your help.
 
Glenn Darrel Sanford
eXp World Holdings, Inc. - Founder, Chairman, CEO & Treasurer
Thanks, Tom.
 
Unidentified Company Representative
All right all, thank you. As a reminder, please visit expworldholdings.com for the latest update on EXP News results and events.
Additionally, you will find the recording of this call and our latest investor presentation. Thank you for joining today. This concludes the
EXP World Holdings Q3 2022 earnings fireside chat.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
©2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.