CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
Beth Boulerice
LXP Industrial Trust - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
 
Brendan P. Mullinix
LXP Industrial Trust - CIO & Executive VP
 
Heather T. Gentry
LXP Industrial Trust - SVP of IR
 
James Dudley
LXP Industrial Trust - Executive VP & Director of Asset Management
 
T. Wilson Eglin
LXP Industrial Trust - Chairman, President & CEO
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
James Allen Villard
 
Jing Xian Tan Bonnel
 
Jonathan Michael Petersen
Jefferies LLC, Research Division - SVP & Equity Analyst
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Good day. My name is Chantel, and I will be your conference operator today. At this time, I would like to welcome everyone to the LXP
Industrial Trust Third Quarter 2022 Earnings Conference Call and Webcast. As a reminder, today's conference call is being recorded.
(Operator Instructions) Thank you.
Heather Gentry, you may begin your conference.
 
Heather T. Gentry
LXP Industrial Trust - SVP of IR
Thank you, operator. Welcome to LXP Industrial Trust third quarter 2022 conference call and webcast. The earnings release was
distributed this morning, and both the release and quarterly supplemental are available on our website at www.lxp.com in the Investors
section and will be furnished to the SEC on a Form 8-K.
Certain statements made during this conference call regarding future events and expected results may constitute forward-looking
statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. LXP believes that these statements are based on
reasonable assumptions. However, certain factors and risks, including those included in today's earnings press release and those
described in reports that LXP files with the SEC from time to time, could cause LXP's actual results to differ materially from those
expressed or implied by such statements. Except as required by law, LXP does not undertake a duty to update any forward-looking
statements.
In the earnings press release and quarterly supplemental disclosure package, LXP has reconciled all non-GAAP financial measures to the
most directly comparable GAAP measure. Any references in these documents to adjusted company FFO refer to adjusted company funds
from operations available to all equity holders and unitholders on a fully diluted basis. Operating performance measures of an individual
investment are not intended to be viewed as presenting a numerical measure of LXP's historical or future financial performance, financial
position or cash flows.
On today's call, Will Eglin, Chairman and CEO; Beth Boulerice, CFO; Brendan Mullinix, CIO; and Executive Vice President, James Dudley,
will provide a recent business update and commentary on third quarter results.
I will now turn the call over to Will.
 
T. Wilson Eglin
LXP Industrial Trust - Chairman, President & CEO
Thanks, Heather, and good morning, everyone. We delivered solid third quarter results as our team continues to execute our prudent
disposition and investment strategies to enhance our portfolio and drive strong leasing and rental growth.
Our industrial portfolio continues to perform well with quarterly same-store NOI growth of 6.2%. Additionally, our weighted average
lease term of 6.4 years, investment-grade tenancy of 59.1%, average building age of 8.6 years and functional utility of our industrial
assets provides us with stability and valuable defensive attributes.
We are confident in our ability to continue to build on our momentum to drive strong financial performance and enhance shareholder
value as we capitalize on leasing and re-leasing opportunities and advance our development pipeline.
Asset sales for the quarter totaled $92 million at weighted average GAAP and cash cap rates of 5.4% and 5.1%, respectively. We are in
the home stretch for dispositions in our office and other assets portfolio, with 2 properties sold during the quarter, 1 subsequent to
quarter end and an additional 5 currently targeted to be sold by year-end or first quarter 2023.
Subsequent to quarter end, we sold the Parachute, Colorado asset in our DK office joint venture, and we are working on other sales in
this portfolio. After selling our remaining 2 Louisiana industrial assets in the second quarter, we sold 1 industrial asset in the third
quarter, which marked our departure from Oregon. These sales are consistent with our strategy to dispose of industrial assets in noncore
markets that do not fit our growth priorities.
This plan is primarily focused on industrial assets in St. Louis, Cleveland, Kansas City, Philadelphia and Detroit, consisting of 8 buildings
with estimated NOI of $19.3 million. We expect proceeds from sales will be used to fund development, invest in our target markets and to
retire debt.
Development funding in our ongoing 6 projects was roughly $71 million in the quarter. We substantially completed our 1.1 million square
foot project in Etna, Ohio in the third quarter. And subsequent to quarter end, we leased 100 acres of land at our Woolf Farms site in
Phoenix. Our remaining projects are estimated for substantial completion by the end of this year through second quarter of 2023.
We continue to produce strong leasing performance, with 270,000 square feet leased during the quarter at high industrial-based and
cash-based rental spreads of 47% and 41%, respectively. Year to date, base and cash base rents on new and extended industrial leases
increased approximately 31% and 26%, respectively, with average annual escalations of 3.4% or [4 million] square feet of leasing
volume. Our leasing outlook remains positive for next year, and we believe we continue to have a very good mark-to-market opportunity
ahead of us.
We returned capital to shareholders during the quarter through the repurchase of 5.6 million common shares at an average price of
$10.16 per share. Year-to-date, we've returned a total of $131 million to shareholders via share repurchase activity.
Going forward, share repurchases will be considered in the context of maintaining leverage within our target range of 6 to 7x net debt to
adjusted EBITDA and development funding needs. Leverage increased during the quarter, but is expected to decline when proceeds of
our forward equity are utilized at year-end to reduce debt levels.
We also announced this morning that our Board of Trustees authorized a quarterly dividend increase that reflects the strength of our
operations. The new declared quarterly common share dividend, which will be paid in the first quarter of 2023, will be $0.125 per share,
representing an increase of approximately 4.2% over the prior quarterly dividend.
On the ESG front, we're pleased to have published our second corporate responsibility report in October, which includes a comprehensive
overview of the significant progress we are making on our ESG and our initiatives and strategies. A commitment to ESG is core to who we
are at LXP, and we are dedicated to continuing to advance our initiatives and enhance our policies and practices to help our tenants
create a more sustainable future to embrace diversity and inclusion on our team and in our communities and to foster a culture that
supports and empowers our employees.
In recognition of our progress to date, we received a score of A for public disclosure reporting, above the global average, in this year's
GRESB Real Estate Assessment and increased our overall score relative to last year.
We also remain committed to best-in-class governance practices, including ensuring we have the right Board structure to continue to
oversee the execution of our strategy and maximize value for shareholders. In addition to refreshing our Board with 7 new independent
members since 2015, our Nominating Committee recently adopted a resolution to recommend Jamie Handwerker as the next lead
trustee in May 2023 when our current lead trustee, Richard Frary, steps down.
In summary, we believe the industrial sector continues to perform well, despite valuations that have been impacted by higher interest
rates and financial market conditions. While our portfolio value is not immune to these effects, so far, we have seen little softening in
tenant demand.
We remain very focused on our development initiatives as well as leasing existing vacancy, stabilizing our development projects,
maintaining high levels of occupancy and raising rents.
With that, I'll turn the call over to Brendan to discuss investments in more detail.
 
Brendan P. Mullinix
LXP Industrial Trust - CIO & Executive VP
Thanks, Will.
Full 2022 development spend on the 6 ongoing projects through the third quarter was approximately $192 million, and we anticipate an
additional $56 million to be funded by year-end.
Our Etna, Ohio development projects that reached substantial completion on September 30, resides in a prime location in the East
Columbus submarket right off 570 and spans 1.1 million square feet. This Class A warehouse distribution facility features modern specs,
including a 40-foot clear height. We have experienced a good deal of tenant interest since the project completion, and we are hopeful a
full building user will occupy the space in the coming months.
We also expect to deliver our Ocala and Indianapolis projects, along with the previously leased building at our Greenville-Spartanburg
3-property projects by year-end.
Also subsequent to quarter end, we entered a 20-year ground lease with a data center user for approximately 100 acres at our 420-acre
Woolf Farms Land parcel in Phoenix. Initial annual ground rent for these approximately 100 acres is estimated to be $5.2 million, with
4% annual rental increases. This is a great outcome, as approximately 25% of the site is already expected to produce an initial 5.2%
annual return on our original $101 million purchase.
The lease includes options to extend for up to an additional 30 years as well as a purchase option after 2 years for $20 a square foot, a
significant appreciation in asset value when compared to the $5.50 per square foot we paid for the land in December 2021. We continue
to work on our development plans for additional projects at the site where user interest remains quite strong.
Looking ahead to 2023, we anticipate development spend for our ongoing 6 development projects will be approximately $113 million,
excluding partner promotes.
With that, I'll turn the call over to James to discuss leasing.
 
James Dudley
LXP Industrial Trust - Executive VP & Director of Asset Management
Thanks, Brendan. In general, tenant demand remains positive, despite pockets of softening in certain markets due to some
supply-demand imbalances. More specifically, rent growth in our target markets grew on average 25% year-over-year through the third
quarter.
We currently estimate our industrial portfolios and place leases to be approximately 20% below market based on independent broker
estimates, presenting us with significant future mark-to-market opportunities. In fact, our industrial portfolio cash rents today are
forecasted to grow on average 43% for lease expirations through 2028 or 33% when adjusted for rent escalations based on independent
broker estimates. Our mark-to-market opportunity underscores our successful portfolio strategy to grow in key markets with high-quality
assets that are likely to attract strong tenant interest.
Vacancy remains low in our stabilized industrial portfolio, with occupancy of 99.4%, representing a slight increase when compared to
last quarter. For the remainder of 2022 and into 2023, we intend to focus on leasing our small amount of existing vacancy as well as
stabilizing our development portfolio.
With respect to the remaining 2023 expirations, we expect expiring rents to increase within a range of 40% to 50% based on current
negotiations and third-party broker estimates.
Notable industrial leasing activity during the quarter included a second-generation 3-year extension with 3.8% bumps on an early 2023
expiration in Tampa, Florida, resulting in a 41% cash rental increase as well as a new lease for the remaining 36,274 square feet space in
our Lakeland, Florida facility for 5 years. This lease resulted in a starting rent of $7 a square foot, approximately 35% above our original
underwriting assumptions with annual bumps of 4%.
Subsequent to quarter end, we had successful leasing outcomes for an existing lease and a new lease on vacant space in our 510,000
square foot industrial facility in Dallas, Texas. We extended a 2023 expiration for 3 years with 4% annual rent bumps and increased the
rent by 43% over the prior terms cash-based rent.
We also leased 81,000 square feet at our 211,000 square foot industrial facility in Greer, South Carolina for just over 5 years, bringing the
building to full occupancy. The starting rental rate of $6.25 is roughly 17% above our original underwriting assumptions, and the 4%
annual rent bumps are very attractive.
We continue to receive indications of interest and field RFPs for our development portfolio, and we will continue to provide updates as
this activity progresses.
With that, I'll turn the call over to Beth to discuss financial results.
 
Beth Boulerice
LXP Industrial Trust - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
Thanks, James.
Third quarter revenue was approximately $80 million, with property operating expenses of $14 million, of which 85% was attributable to
tenant reimbursement.
Adjusted company FFO for the quarter was approximately $48 million or $0.17 per diluted common share. We announced this morning
that we are tightening our 2022 guidance range to $0.65 to $0.68 per diluted share by raising the low end by $0.01 per share.
G&A in the quarter was approximately $9 million, and we expect our 2022 G&A to be within a range of $35 million to $37 million,
excluding certain advisory costs.
Our same-store industrial portfolio was 99.8% leased at quarter end, and our same-store industrial NOI grew 6.2% quarter-over-quarter
and 5.3% year-to-date. We are increasing our 2022 industrial same-store NOI growth guidance by 75 basis points at the midpoint to a
range of 5% to 5.5%. At quarter end, approximately 96.5% of our industrial portfolio leases had escalations with an average annual rate
of 2.4%.
The majority of our office portfolio remains held for sale as of September 30, with the aggregate market value for these properties now
estimated to be within a range of $95 million to $105 million and forecasted 2022 NOI of approximately $11 million.
Net debt to adjusted EBITDA at quarter end was 7.1x, which we expect to decline by year-end in conjunction with the maturity of the
forward equity contracts. Had we settled the contracts at quarter end, our net debt to adjusted EBITDA would have been 6.3x.
As of September 30, we had an aggregate of $182.1 million under unsettled forward common share sale contract, which we intend to
settle at contract maturity in December.
At quarter end, our unsecured NOI was over 93% of our total NOI.
We currently have $450 million of borrowing capacity available under our unsecured revolving credit facility. During the quarter, we
amended our unsecured credit facility, extending the maturity of the revolving portion out to July 2026 for added balance sheet flexibility
and improve the terms for applicable margin and debt covenant calculations.
Consolidated debt outstanding at quarter end was approximately $1.6 billion, with over 84% of this debt fixed. Total consolidated debt
had a weighted average interest rate of 3.1% and a weighted average term to maturity of 6.5 years at quarter end, continuing to keep us
well protected against rising rates.
With that, I'll turn the call back over to Will.
 
T. Wilson Eglin
LXP Industrial Trust - Chairman, President & CEO
Thanks, Beth. I will now turn the call over to the operator who will conduct the question-and-answer portion of this call.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) Our first question comes from James Allen Villard with Ladenburg Thalmann.
 
James Allen Villard
Can you give us some more color on the 100 acres in Phoenix that you rent subsequent to quarter end?
 
Brendan P. Mullinix
LXP Industrial Trust - CIO & Executive VP
Sure, sure. As I indicated in the prepared remarks, it's 100 acres that we ground lease to a data center operator who plans to develop a
data center park on that portion of the site. The lease has an initial term of 20 years, and there are extension options for 30 years beyond
that. .
 
James Allen Villard
Okay. That's helpful. Yes, just kind of big and -- kind of big picture. How are you balancing kind of stock repurchases versus
deleveraging? And would the trust preferred be a potential target for deleveraging activity?
 
T. Wilson Eglin
LXP Industrial Trust - Chairman, President & CEO
Yes. As I said, one of the things that we're monitoring is just making sure that we're keeping our overall leverage within that 6 to 7x area.
Buyback has been a good use of capital this year compared to acquisitions. Our funding needs for our projects underway at the moment
aren't huge next year, but we want to have capital available to exploit opportunity in the land bank, especially Woolf Farms, where we
had a great outcome on that land lease that Brendan was just talking about, that we want to have capital available to build as well.
The trust preferred is interesting because that's the sort of principal piece of our floating rate exposure, but it's roughly a 15-year
maturity. So while it would be, from a deleveraging standpoint, I guess, the highest return, you sort of have to balance that compared to
the shorter maturities in 2024 and 2025.
 
James Allen Villard
That's kind of helpful. That's helpful. Kind of just bigger picture, what are you seeing in the acquisition and the disposition market today?
And kind of how are you thinking about it going into 2023?
 
Brendan P. Mullinix
LXP Industrial Trust - CIO & Executive VP
Well, the -- just broadly speaking, the transaction market continues to be really slow, and there's a lot of price discovery in the market
that began with the spike in inflation expectation and rising interest rates. So that market is pretty tough to peg today.
In terms of our own activity today and how we're looking at capital allocation presently, we're really, as we've said before, focused on our
ongoing development pipeline and future opportunities in our existing land bank. So we're not presently active in the acquisition market,
although we're monitoring it.
 
T. Wilson Eglin
LXP Industrial Trust - Chairman, President & CEO
And on the disposition side, we mentioned in the comments that we have some properties in markets where we have just 1 or 2 buildings
that we'll look at as sources of liquidity to keep our revolver balances low next year. And we can't give pricing information there yet, but I
will say that we've got the 2 Michigan assets in the market, and there's very strong investor interest.
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) There are no further questions at this time. I'll now turn the call back over to Will Eglin -- we have one more
question from Jon Petersen with Jefferies.
 
Jonathan Michael Petersen
Jefferies LLC, Research Division - SVP & Equity Analyst
So on the -- I guess, on the development portfolio, I know you got a decent amount that still needs some pre-leasing, and it seems like
demand for industrial still remains strong. But I mean, anything you're seeing in the macro environment that might be slowing down kind
of the potential to lease some of those developments? Has expected yields changed at all, just given everything that's been going on in
the world?
 
James Dudley
LXP Industrial Trust - Executive VP & Director of Asset Management
Yes. Why don't I...
 
Brendan P. Mullinix
LXP Industrial Trust - CIO & Executive VP
Sure, J.D., if you want to talk about the demand side from users, why don't you start with that?
 
James Dudley
LXP Industrial Trust - Executive VP & Director of Asset Management
Okay. So there's still quite a bit of demand in all of our markets. We're tracking north of $10 million in every one of our development
markets and then $20 million in some. I will say the user demand has maybe slowed a little bit just from a decision-making perspective.
It seems like maybe there's not as much pre-leasing right now, and users are taking a little bit more time to make their decisions. And it
does seem like it's softer, but I just would point out that, that's relative to a record selling year last year, and that this year still seems to
be on track to be the second highest absorption year in history.
So though it feels softer relative to what it was last year, and I do think that there's still significant demand in the market, and that we're
going to have positive outcomes. So there may be a little bit of downtime to lease them versus pre-leasing.
 
Brendan P. Mullinix
LXP Industrial Trust - CIO & Executive VP
And then in regard to your question on yield, I do think that there may be opportunities for our projects to exceed our past yield
expectations just as a result of market rent growth that has occurred during the development process of these buildings as well as, as
you're aware, we do develop in joint venture. And with rising exit cap rates, that -- the partner promotes are very sensitive to that.
So between some market rent growth and higher exit cap rates, lower promotes -- or after-promote yield, I think there's good -- there are
opportunities there to exceed our prior guidance on yield.
 
Jonathan Michael Petersen
Jefferies LLC, Research Division - SVP & Equity Analyst
Okay. All right. That's helpful. And then on office sales, and I know the prior indications were to get it done by year-end. I think you
indicated some of that might be pushed into the first quarter of next year.
I mean, can you pull back the curtain a little bit? I mean, is there -- there's been a lot of retrading. Have we been close to selling some of
these buildings? And then obviously, the debt markets move and some of these deals fall through. Like can you give us a little more
context on how...
 
T. Wilson Eglin
LXP Industrial Trust - Chairman, President & CEO
Yes, I mean, I think the CAE property in New Jersey, which has the longest lease has been the one that's been most sensitive to debt
market conditions. The 2 other big components of value are the Wells Fargo facilities and 1701 Market Street, where we're working with
buyers. We just don't have them under contract with nonrefundable deposits yet. So we're making progress. Unfortunately, it has
become just a more challenging market to transact in. .
 
Jonathan Michael Petersen
Jefferies LLC, Research Division - SVP & Equity Analyst
Okay. And I apologize if I missed this, but did you indicate what the mark-to-market is on your portfolio right now? .
 
T. Wilson Eglin
LXP Industrial Trust - Chairman, President & CEO
20% at the moment.
 
Jonathan Michael Petersen
Jefferies LLC, Research Division - SVP & Equity Analyst
Is that GAAP or cash?
 
T. Wilson Eglin
LXP Industrial Trust - Chairman, President & CEO
Cash.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from Camille Bonnel with Bank of America.
 
Jing Xian Tan Bonnel
I see over the past few years you've been shifting the weighted average lease term to shorter duration. Could you just comment on what
you see as an appropriate level for the portfolio? And how these -- the lease terms in your leasing pipeline are trending?
 
T. Wilson Eglin
LXP Industrial Trust - Chairman, President & CEO
Sure. I think weighted average lease term has been trending shorter and will continue to do so. I think if it makes it to 5 years, that's
about the right balance between short-term leasing opportunity and longer-term stability of cash flow.
And in terms of leasing on rollover, sometimes, we get sort of 3- to 5-year extensions. Often on new construction, tenants are making
significant investments in those facilities and are negotiating for more term. So it's a little bit hard to predict. We just try to make the
most of every negotiation to do what's right for each asset.
 
Jing Xian Tan Bonnel
Okay. And just final question for me. In your opening remarks, you commented on higher lease escalation -- escalators signed on new
leases. Could you comment what it is on a portfolio level?
 
T. Wilson Eglin
LXP Industrial Trust - Chairman, President & CEO
Sure. We're at about 2.4% at the moment. On leases that we completed this year, we had 3.4% on about 4 million feet. And we have
signed some recent leases with 4% escalators. So that's still continuing to move in our favor overall.
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) There are no further questions at this time. I'll now turn the call back over to Will Eglin for closing remarks.
 
T. Wilson Eglin
LXP Industrial Trust - Chairman, President & CEO
Well, once again, we thank you for joining us this morning, and we encourage you to visit our website or contact Heather Gentry if you
would like to receive our quarterly materials. And in addition, as always, you may contact me or any other member of our senior
management team with any questions. Thanks again, and have a great day.
 
Operator
This concludes today's conference call. You may now disconnect.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
©2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.