CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
Brandon S. Togashi
National Storage Affiliates Trust - Executive VP, CFO, CAO & Treasurer
 
David G. Cramer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - President, COO & Member of Pro Advisory Committee
 
George Andrew Hoglund
National Storage Affiliates Trust - VP of IR
 
Tamara D. Fischer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - CEO & Trustee
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
Juan Carlos Sanabria
BMO Capital Markets Equity Research - MD & Senior U.S. Real Estate Analyst
 
Michael Goldsmith
UBS Investment Bank, Research Division - Associate Director and Associate Analyst
 
Neil Lawrence Malkin
Capital One Securities, Inc., Research Division - Analyst
 
Ronald Kamdem
Morgan Stanley, Research Division - Equity Analyst
 
Smedes Rose
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - Director & Senior Analyst
 
Todd Michael Thomas
KeyBanc Capital Markets Inc., Research Division - MD & Senior Equity Research Analyst
 
Wesley Keith Golladay
Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division - Senior Research Analyst
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Greetings, and welcome to the National Storage Affiliates' Third Quarter 2022 Conference Call. (Operator Instructions) As a reminder,
this conference is being recorded.
It is now my pleasure to introduce your host, George Hoglund, Vice President of Investor Relations for National Storage Affiliates. Thank
you, Mr. Hoglund. You may begin.
 
George Andrew Hoglund
National Storage Affiliates Trust - VP of IR
We'd like to thank you for joining us today for the third quarter 2022 earnings conference call of National Storage Affiliates Trust. On the
line with me here today are NSA's CEO, Tamara Fischer; President and COO, Dave Cramer; and CFO, Brandon Togashi.
Following prepared remarks, management will accept questions from registered financial analysts. (Operator Instructions)
In addition to the press release distributed yesterday afternoon, we furnished our supplemental package with additional detail on our
results, which may be found in the Investor Relations section on our website at nationalstorageaffiliates.com.
On today's call, management's prepared remarks and answers to your questions may contain forward-looking statements that are
subject to risks and uncertainties and represent management's estimates as of today, November 3, 2022. The company assumes no
obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements because of changing market conditions or other circumstances after the
date of this conference call.
The company cautions that actual results may differ materially from those projected in any forward-looking statements. For additional
detail concerning our forward-looking statements, please refer to our public filings with the SEC.
We also encourage listeners to review the definitions and reconciliations of non-GAAP financial measures such as FFO, core FFO and net
operating income contained in the supplemental information package available in the Investor Relations section on our website and in
our SEC filings.
I will now turn the call over to Tammy.
 
Tamara D. Fischer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - CEO & Trustee
Thank you, George, and thanks, everyone, for joining our call today. I'll start the call by addressing the recent hurricanes, Fiona and Ian,
and expressing our compassion for all who are affected by the storms. We're pleased to report that all of our team members were safe
and accounted for subsequent to the hurricanes. And although a number of our stores, primarily in Florida were impacted to a certain
degree, all of our stores are currently open and operational.
I'd also like to thank our team for their extraordinary response to the storms, both in terms of watching out for each other, taking care of
our customers and so quickly working to assess damages, get the clean-up process underway and resume normal operations.
Now moving on to results. We delivered another great quarter with growth in core FFO per share of 26.3% and same-store NOI growth of
12.1%.
As expected, our results continue to moderate from record levels as we face tougher year-over-year comps and a return to more normal
seasonality. The moderation is also fueled by inflationary pressures on the consumer.
As we close out 2022 and enter what may well be an even more challenging macroeconomic environment in 2023, keep in mind that the
self-storage asset class has historically proven to be quite recession-resilient through various economic cycles.
The sector benefits from unique countercyclical demand factors, including demand driven by household contraction and necessity-based
relocations. Further, the pandemic introduced new customers to self-storage who have realized the convenience and affordability of the
product, particularly in a time of increasing cost per square foot for housing.
Finally, with the benefits of our differentiated PRO structure and our broad geographic exposure, we remain very confident in NSA's
future prospects.
Now turning to investment activity in the third quarter. We acquired 23 wholly owned properties, investing $322 million at an average
cap rate of 5.4%. 20 of these stores are in Texas, Florida, Georgia and South Carolina, a great fit for our existing portfolio in fast-growing
Sunbelt markets.
While the transaction market has slowed from last year's record pace, we're still seeing opportunities come to market, and we continue to
evaluate deals where it makes sense. But we're definitely being very selective in the face of today's increased cost of capital. There is still
a relatively significant bid-ask gap between buyer and seller expectations. So we expect that Q4 will be relatively quiet on the transaction
front.
Going forward, we will remain opportunistic with respect to our capital and investment strategy, always with an eye to creating value for
our shareholders over the long term.
Overall, I'd characterize the third quarter as strong performance with moderating fundamentals and in line with our expectations. The
self-storage sector and NSA specifically remain well positioned to navigate the dynamic operating environment as we head into the new
year.
I'll now turn the call over to Dave to discuss current trends and operations. Dave?
 
David G. Cramer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - President, COO & Member of Pro Advisory Committee
Thanks, Tammy. The third quarter benefited from continued strength in self-storage fundamentals. However, we are clearly returning to
normal seasonal patterns, which are being highlighted by a challenging year-over-year comp. Third quarter same-store NOI increased
12.1% over last year, driven by a 10.7% increase in revenue combined with a 6.9% increase in property operating expenses.
Our contract rates were up 15% in the third quarter from the prior year, while street rates were up 10% year-over-year. Consistent with
return to normal seasonality, we continue to see moderation in our street rates, which we expect to continue through the end of the year.
Our rent roll-up was flat for the quarter and is now following normal seasonal trends.
Discounting and concessions remain below historical averages during the quarter, and we've increased our marketing spend as customer
acquisition activity returns to normal.
Same-store occupancy averaged 94.1% for the quarter, down 240 basis points compared to last year. We ended the third quarter with a
same-store occupancy of 92.6%, down 350 basis points compared to the prior year. Occupancy reflects the return to normal seasonality
and the net change year-over-year is directly related to an abnormal comp last year. Although we're experiencing moderation across the
portfolio, I think it's worthwhile to point out that we're on track to stabilize above pre-pandemic levels.
To give you a sense of where we were versus 3 years ago, [tier] rates in Q3 2022 were about 37% higher than Q3 2019 and in-place
contract rents are about 24% higher. Occupancy is also about 320 basis points higher.
Our average length of stay for tenants that have moved out has increased from 15.5 months to 16.2 months. The percent of customers
that have stayed with us for longer than 2 years has increased from 45% to 50%. All of these data points support our views that
fundamentals remain healthy.
Looking at geographic performance. The Sunbelt continues to outperform with states such as North Carolina, Georgia, Texas and
Florida, all generating above portfolio average revenue growth. Several of our smaller markets such as Oklahoma City, New Orleans,
Savannah and Wilmington, are outperforming the portfolio average as well. This reinforces our strategic market focus and continued
emphasis on geographic diversity.
I'll now turn the call over to Brandon to provide more detail on our financial and balance sheet activity.
 
Brandon S. Togashi
National Storage Affiliates Trust - Executive VP, CFO, CAO & Treasurer
Thank you, Dave. Yesterday afternoon, we reported core FFO per share of $0.72 for the third quarter of 2022, which represents an
increase of 26% over the prior year period. This continued robust year-over-year growth was driven by a combination of double-digit
same-store growth and our healthy acquisition volume over the past 4 quarters.
Our third quarter results represented a record seventh consecutive quarter that we achieved double-digit same-store NOI growth.
Additionally, approximately 30% of our wholly owned portfolio is in our non-same-store pool, and we're very encouraged by the
outperformance relative to underwriting for these properties, which were mostly acquired in 2021 and will be eligible for same-store
inclusion beginning in 2023.
Regarding operating expenses. Our third quarter growth of 6.9% reflected inflationary pressures that we're seeing across the economy as
well as property taxes driven by significant increases in self-storage property values. The third quarter increase in same-store OpEx is due
primarily to a 6.1% increase in property taxes driven by Texas, Georgia and Florida, a 12.4% increase in utilities and a 28.6% increase in
marketing spend. Repairs and maintenance grew 4.1%, while personnel costs grew just 2.6%.
While the increase in marketing spend was significant, in Q3 of last year, we experienced a decline of over 10%, so the 2-year average
increase is about 9%.
Turning to the balance sheet. During the quarter, we closed on a $200 million 10-year unsecured debt private placement with a fixed
rate of 5.06%. At quarter end, our leverage was 6x net debt to EBITDA, right in the middle of our targeted range of 5.5 or 6.5x.
We are very comfortable with our balance sheet with no maturities through 2022 and $375 million scheduled to mature in 2023, $300
million of which consists of 2 term loans that we will address over the few months. Approximately 24% of our debt is subject to variable
rate exposure, half of which is the revolver. And we had over $210 million of availability on the revolver at quarter end.
We're committed to maintaining a conservative leverage profile and healthy access to multiple sources of capital.
Now moving on to guidance. As Tammy and Dave touched on, we have seen a return of normal seasonality and trends in fundamentals
throughout third quarter and continuing into the fourth quarter, which is driving the moderation in same-store NOI as we move gradually
back toward long-term historical averages.
However, our expense growth is trending a bit higher than we previously expected, as I mentioned before regarding property taxes and
inflationary pressures. As a result, for the full year 2022, we estimate same-store revenue growth of 11.5% to 12.5%, a tighter range than
previous guidance while keeping the midpoint of 12%.
Expense growth of 5.5% to 6.5% up from the previous range of 5% and 6.25% and NOI growth of 14% to 15%, with the midpoint of 14.5%
or 50 basis points below the prior midpoint.
Additionally, the rapid rise in interest rates is pressuring interest expense, which combined with an income tax charge during the third
quarter, will weigh on core FFO per share by approximately $0.02 for full year 2022.
The combination of these factors results in us adjusting the midpoint of our core FFO per share guidance down by $0.015 to $2.81. The
updated range is $2.80 to $2.82. The midpoint represents an impressive 24% growth above our strong 2021 results and a 2-year
combined increase of 64% over our FFO per share in 2020.
Thanks again for joining our call today. Let's now turn it back to the operator to take your questions. Operator?
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) Our first questions come from the line of Juan Sanabria with BMO Capital Markets.
 
Juan Carlos Sanabria
BMO Capital Markets Equity Research - MD & Senior U.S. Real Estate Analyst
A question on ECRIs. It sounded like you gave how much rates have increased, both in-place and street rates over the last couple of years
or since pre-COVID. And it seems like maybe there's some room for continued ECRI increases at kind of above pre-COVID levels. Just
curious on your view on if, in fact, that's accurate and kind of how we should think about ECRIs in '23 versus what you've been able to
achieve through '22?
 
David G. Cramer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - President, COO & Member of Pro Advisory Committee
Yes. Thanks, Juan. This is Dave. Good question. It's certainly not going to really point to 2023 yet. But I can tell you, as we looked at the
third quarter, our cadence and our activity and the amount of rate increases remain very stable, which was encouraging. The tenant
reaction to those increases remained stable as well. So as we look at customer behavior finishing out the year and really look how we
model our in-place rent changes as we move forward, we're still pretty confident in the program and the way we're running. We're still
confident in our cadence. And we'll just have to monitor what happens. As we look as occupancy numbers and street rates move around
a little bit, we'll have to look at what customer behaviors do if they change at all over the upcoming pieces -- or the upcoming period,
excuse me.
But just 1 part of the puzzle. I mean, we're looking at occupancy, we're looking at street. We're looking at concessions. We're looking at
the in-place rent changes to find the revenue goal that is satisfying to us. We've had a lot of discussion about this, and I've been at this for
a few years now. And we had -- I was with SecurCare back when we were private in 2008. And I can tell you, even in the toughest times of
that Great Financial Crisis, through that period, we were still able to do in-place rent changes. Maybe the amounts may not have been as
much, maybe the tenants may not have been as much, but we didn't -- the financial pressures we may be facing, the economy may be
facing right now didn't really deter us back then from really continuing on some form of IPRC program.
 
Juan Carlos Sanabria
BMO Capital Markets Equity Research - MD & Senior U.S. Real Estate Analyst
And then just as a second question. Curious if you guys looked at Storage Express, either the assets or the software, and as a result or --
and as a result of the transaction there, do you think you're going to see or are seeing more competition for assets in your secondary or
tertiary markets? And/or kind of a subquestion, do you think that there is the opportunity to continue to use technology to improve
efficiencies and maybe go more remote in store management?
 
David G. Cramer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - President, COO & Member of Pro Advisory Committee
Yes. Another good question. We've known Jefferson for a long time. We've been around his product for a long time and watch him
develop a very good model that worked extremely well. And so we're familiar from a lot of different points of view on what he was able to
accomplish.
We are running storage remotely now. We're running storage either as an annex or even just purely remotely. And we have technology in
place that aids us to do that. We have room to improve, and we are working on improvements through that technology piece.
We certainly think, as we look at our future, that's away from a payroll savings perspective as you look at store hours and maybe overall
headcount. It also allows you the ability to buy smaller properties within our markets that fit very nicely and run them as maybe a
hub-and-spoke-type concept, where you have some floating person around where you can take care of 2, 3 stores with less headcount.
And we've done that over the years and demonstrated that, that is effective for us in certain markets.
And to the last part of your question, could this introduce more competition for people buying properties in our markets? It could. But
there are other operators that have been running this for quite a while now, and we've been around those operators for a number of
years. And so I don't know if it significantly changes the landscape at this point.
 
Juan Carlos Sanabria
BMO Capital Markets Equity Research - MD & Senior U.S. Real Estate Analyst
And then just maybe if I could sneak in a quick third one. Could you give us any sense of the third quarter trends or the -- sorry, the
October trends in occupancy and street rates to compare versus the third quarter levels?
 
David G. Cramer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - President, COO & Member of Pro Advisory Committee
We did experience straight rate growth year-over-year in October. It is obviously coming off, continuing to reduce as you think about
where the end of the third quarter, where September was to October, but we did -- it's still year-over-year an increase, which is a positive
sign for us.
And occupancy continued to come down off its levels. I mean occupancy levels came down in the month of October to let me speak to --
the number I give you is 91.4%. So it dropped from the quarter end average down to 91%, and we finished into the third quarter at 92.6%.
So we did have a continued reduction in occupancy levels in October.
 
Operator
Our next questions come from the line of Neil Malkin with Capital One Securities.
 
Neil Lawrence Malkin
Capital One Securities, Inc., Research Division - Analyst
Just sticking on that last question. That occupancy, a, versus the September occupancy versus the average for third quarter, that slowed,
I think, the most versus peers. And then again, you saw a pretty significant slowdown in October. It looks like it's going to be well short of
the -- sort of from peak deterioration that you outlined previously that you expect for Q4.
So maybe can you help us understand what is leading to that? It seems like a more significant fall in occupancy versus kind of what we
expected the sort of new post-COVID model to look like. Is it small versus large markets? Is it too much pushing on IPRC and not enough
concessions? Like any comments on occupancy and how you see that continuing to play out and your comfort level at the current levels?
 
David G. Cramer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - President, COO & Member of Pro Advisory Committee
Good question. And there's a lot of pieces to this. I mean, we certainly have had markets that have come off on occupancy that are still
posting very large revenue gains. I mean, if you looked at the Atlanta, Riverside or Sarasota, Florida, where they've had 5% occupancy
loss, but still posting 15%, 17% revenue gain. So we look at it as it's one of the pieces of the puzzle.
If you look at our portfolio, historically, we've always ran a little lighter than our peers. We're comfortable with that. It fits in our markets.
It fits in our revenue models and it fits in our business plan. And so as we're looking at this really challenging occupancy comp versus last
year, we're trying to navigate the waters of where we want to land, where it fits in with our revenue modeling and really, where that
occupancy discount, street rate, in-place rate all fit together, and it's a big puzzle.
So to your point, I do acknowledge, I think the occupancy drop was a little quicker and a little steeper than we thought, and we're making
adjustments to our marketing strategies. We're making adjustments to discounting and really street rates, where we're going to be
positioned in markets within the street rates.
And so I think we're aware of it. In certain markets, we're adjusting to it. In certain markets, we're just fine. So there's a lot of pieces of
that puzzle that we look at. But just maybe just a little quicker on the occupancy drop that we had probably had forecast in the second
quarter.
 
Neil Lawrence Malkin
Capital One Securities, Inc., Research Division - Analyst
Yes. Okay. And I guess, just going a little further on the comment you just made, is it fair to expect higher marketing, more discounting
or, I guess, more pressure on net pricing, net rates, at least maybe until you feel comfortable that occupancy continues or kind of stops
eroding at a faster rate than you would have thought?
 
David G. Cramer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - President, COO & Member of Pro Advisory Committee
Yes, I think that's fair. We're doing all of those things. And you got to look at this market-by-market to it, that affects the overall portfolio.
Keep in mind, we also have a little bit of drag in Portland and Portland is a different market we'll talk about here shortly. But to your
point, we're looking at all those levers.
Marketing spend was up for the quarter. So you saw the third quarter weight did have a pretty significant dip in marketing. Now the peer
average was not as high, but 28% year-over-year. So clearly, last year, we had easy selling and marketing expense. And this year, we had
to certainly lean on that a lot more.
We'll lean on the marketing piece as we go into the fourth quarter. We'll start to look more around street rate and where we're positioned
in market. The third quarter discounts were very, very low, 2.2% of revenue. So we still have some opportunity around discounts, if we
want to use that lever to continue to find what the right math problem is to revenue.
We acknowledge that occupancy is a big piece of that, but also these other factors come into play. And overall, if you think about it, we're
very happy with our contract rate growth, which was 15% for the quarter as well. So it was a nice balancing offset to the occupancy piece.
 
Brandon S. Togashi
National Storage Affiliates Trust - Executive VP, CFO, CAO & Treasurer
Neil, this is Brandon. Just a little color too on that. So like in my opening remarks on the marketing spend, I mentioned last year, Q3, we
were negative growth on the marketing 10%. Similarly, in the fourth quarter, we were negative 12% year-over-year. So as we have
increased our spend this year, and that's going to continue into Q4 and then it's also going to compare against some really challenging
comps. So that's absolutely going to be elevated on a year-over-year basis.
 
Neil Lawrence Malkin
Capital One Securities, Inc., Research Division - Analyst
Okay. Yes. That's helpful. Other one for me is you're traditionally not a seller. But if you just look at the performance of your stock, have
you thought about or are closer to potentially looking at leverage-neutral buybacks? Or how do you think about capital allocation and
also balancing sort of macro uncertainty in general?
 
Tamara D. Fischer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - CEO & Trustee
Good question, Neil. I think that looking at the -- looking at our use of capital and sources of capital, it's really on us in any case, to make
sure that we're evaluating our portfolio and selectively disposing of assets.
As you said, we're not really -- we haven't been a big seller. We're not -- I don't think we'll be a big seller, but we see that as an
alternative in terms of sourcing capital. So I think the answer to your question is yes. I don't think you'll see us sell off 100 property
portfolio or anything like that. But I think selectively, we will look to prune the portfolio, that and raise some capital that way in this
environment where the cap rates are, frankly, still better than what we can -- what we could do otherwise and certainly, taking that
capital and redeploying it in the repurchase of our own shares makes all the sense in the world.
 
Operator
Our next questions come from the line of [Lizzie Doykin] with Bank of America.
 
Unidentified Analyst
Great. I just wanted to follow up on the prior point made about adjusting in certain markets and adjusting down in others. Can you kind
of comment on which markets haven't really taking this level of street rate increases as well as others and where maybe you're still
seeing some drag? I know you had mentioned seeing a little bit of drag in Portland. So if you could just give an update on your markets.
 
David G. Cramer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - President, COO & Member of Pro Advisory Committee
Yes. Yes, absolutely. We're still very strong in the Sunbelt in the Southeast. And so you look around Atlanta and the Carolinas and
through Georgia and through Texas, we're still having very good success down in those pieces, both on street and contract rate. Keep in
mind, we're coming off extreme highs. I mean some of those markets were 98% full last year, and now they're running 93% and 92%.
And so that occupancy headwind while on paper may look very, very daunting, for us, those portfolios and those -- more stores in those
markets are settling right in where we want them to be, and we're very comfortable.
We're certainly facing some pressure in Portland. Portland has a number of things going on there. We've talked about in previous calls
and through the past, there was -- pre-pandemic, there was a bunch of new supply brought on and that supply is still there and the
pandemic may have masked the impacts of that supply and now that the pandemic has kind of come back and things are returning back
to normal, Portland's really starting to see some of those pressures of that new supply. Plus there are some economic and social things
going on in Portland that just makes that MSA right now challenging for us.
We'll continue to look at how we operate there. We're not going to go in and try to start some kind of rate war or do something like that.
We'll be smart. I mean you got to realize that the Portland market is going to operate where it operates at and we're going to try to
maximize what that level is.
Phoenix, we're feeling a little bit of pressure. Phoenix also had a bunch of new supply come on through the pandemic and some of that --
some of the housing market is slowing down, maybe some a little bit in migration is slowing down a little bit, Phoenix is starting to show
a little bit of pressure. And so how we manage Phoenix from a street rate perspective, discount perspective, occupancy level is going to
be challenging for us as we go into 2023.
And then really, the rest of the markets, there's not a lot to really call out. We have some stable markets in the Heartland like Oklahoma
City and Tulsa that are just -- they're doing very well. From a historical perspective, they're doing above average, but they're certainly not
doing what the portfolio level is, but we're very comfortable in how they're operating and how they perform. And we kind of call them the
steady eddies, but they just perform well over and over and over again and just didn't have the highs and the lows of the pandemic piece
of it.
 
Unidentified Analyst
Okay. And for my second question, I'm curious to hear more about the volume of move-ins and how that trended versus your
expectations and maybe how that compares to the movement from pre-COVID. Has that rate kind of slowed down? Or did you see any
signs of this being below your expectations? And if you could comment on move-outs as well.
 
David G. Cramer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - President, COO & Member of Pro Advisory Committee
Yes. Good question. So certainly, the last year move-ins were less and move-outs were more, and that's comparing to last year. And
that's to be expected. As we look back to 2019, which is really probably the most stable year we could look to before the pandemic, both
move-in and move-out activity are very similar to the patterns we would expect.
So we think it's returning to historical averages based on occupancy portfolio, how many tenants you have in the portfolio, and what's our
expectations around the move metrics of that tenant base. And so that's where I would point you there.
What I would also add to that is the consumer shopping patterns are changing. It's taking more touch points and it's taking more of a lift
to get people to convert today. So one of the things we're very much focused on is marketing spend and really what we're doing with the
conversion rates. And so the team is very dialed into how do we boost that conversion rate and make sure we're using that dollar
effectively. That will bring into play the other levers. Where are we positioned with street rate? What are we doing with discounting? How
well are we closing? And so I think that as I looked at the quarter, really looking ahead is that's back to really normal times of 2019 as
well, and we need to continue to make sure that we're driving efficiencies through our conversion rates.
 
Unidentified Analyst
Great. And if I could follow up on how do you see move-ins? What is the move-in, move-out activity like into October?
 
David G. Cramer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - President, COO & Member of Pro Advisory Committee
October, we saw the occupancy come off of where it was in September. We were happy with where -- again, looking at historical to 2019,
very comfortable. It's a tough comp. I mean, really, in the fourth quarter, we actually grew occupancy into the fourth quarter last year at a
slight pace. And so that's one of the things we were looking at is it's a tough comp year-over-year, but it was very much in line with what
we thought 2019 looked like.
 
Operator
Our next questions come from the line of Smedes Rose with Citi.
 
Smedes Rose
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - Director & Senior Analyst
Just kind of sticking with the occupancy declines, which did seem a little more pronounced maybe relative to your expectations and
certainly to our expectations. And I was just kind of wondering where do you think you might exit the year now on the occupancy front?
 
David G. Cramer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - President, COO & Member of Pro Advisory Committee
I think internally, our expectation is we'd like to flatten it out. We're not looking to lose a lot more occupancy. And so obviously, there's
conditions going on out there with consumers and economic tightening and stuff that we have to navigate. I thought we did a good job
holding our street and contract rate growth in the third quarter.
I think you'll see a little more pressure on street in the fourth quarter and a little more pressure on discounting, which will allow us to
flatten that occupancy piece. And so that's the math problem we're working on. The teams are working on every market and every store
to really find where that balance is. But...
 
Tamara D. Fischer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - CEO & Trustee
And I think, Dave, you called this out in your remarks and in some of the questions here earlier today. But we really don't manage to
occupancy. And Smedes, I think -- I know you know that. We've talked about it a lot. But our objective here is to optimize revenue growth,
and that's been our strategy for a long time, and we'll continue to do that.
I think our view is that occupancy settles out at couple of hundred basis points higher than pre-pandemic levels for us, but probably still a
gap between us and our peers. And yet, we've set out to deliver outstanding growth in same-store revenues, so it did...
 
Smedes Rose
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - Director & Senior Analyst
I appreciate that you're not running it for occupancy, but I mean, I guess there is a -- I mean, there's got to be some point where you and
other operators would pivot to protect occupancy rate. I mean you can't raise rates from empty boxes as they like to say.
And I just wanted to ask you, would you -- I mean, do you feel like it's fair -- I mean it's just like commentary that we've heard from other,
that's just something like your view on it. I mean, in terms of more secondary and tertiary markets, I mean, do you think you're just
inherently more exposed to maybe a more demographically sensitive customer around rates and to what's going on with the economy?
Or do you think that's not -- that doesn't hold water?
 
David G. Cramer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - President, COO & Member of Pro Advisory Committee
I don't think that's an issue at all. I do think one thing that is happening, though, is we didn't have some of the tailwinds of Miami and
New York and L.A. and some of these other markets because of our exposure there. And we were out, we didn't have the rate restrictions
that maybe some of our peers had for a couple of years. And so I think that weighs on us a little bit as you think about year-over-year
results.
I also think last year, we did an excellent job, excellent job driving this portfolio. In my words, I'd use overheating our portfolio. We drove
it to an occupancy level through the back half of the year and a revenue result level that was abnormal for our markets.
And we're settling back into what we think is normal for our markets. To Tammy's point, we think it's going to be above pre-pandemic
levels, which was an objective for us. And so I think all things considered, I don't think it's a tertiary or secondary market question. We're
just settling back into what we feel are very comfortable normals.
 
Smedes Rose
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - Director & Senior Analyst
Okay. And then can I just follow up? I wanted to come back to the share repurchase. I mean, I think you did $50 million and you bought
back at considerably higher prices. So presumably, I mean, would you be interested in maybe getting more aggressive on that front as we
head through the year and given the decline in the stock price here? Or how you -- maybe just kind of go back to how you're thinking
about that program?
 
Tamara D. Fischer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - CEO & Trustee
Well, I think as we think about capital deployment, it's all about where we can achieve the best returns. But I will also say that we are
probably, along with others, being very, very selective, and we will deploy capital opportunistically. But in this current environment,
where cost of capital is high and access is not as free as it was a year or so ago, maybe even 6 months ago, I think I don't have a yes or no,
black and white answer for you, Smedes, but it is an alternative that we will consider as we are thinking about strategic capital
deployment.
But when it's all said and done, it's all about the long term for us and building and delivering long-term shareholder value. And you can
imagine, if we thought it was a great investment at $52, we certainly think it's an even better investment where we are today. But I just --
I don't think there's a black and white answer to your question.
 
Brandon S. Togashi
National Storage Affiliates Trust - Executive VP, CFO, CAO & Treasurer
And Smedes, this is Brandon. The other thing I would add -- the other thing I would add in is just that we -- through today, we've issued
almost 600,000 common OP units, the contributors of properties, and they've taken that equity at a price that's about $54 and change,
and you saw the activity we did on the repurchases was at $52 and change. So there was -- part of our guiding thought on some of this
was, hey, we were able to neutralize some of the dilution impact of equity that we had issued earlier in the year. And so that was also a
point of reference for us in thinking through the execution.
 
Operator
Our next questions come from the line of Michael Goldsmith with UBS.
 
Michael Goldsmith
UBS Investment Bank, Research Division - Associate Director and Associate Analyst
I'm going to try to tie together a couple of different topics that have already been discussed. But Tammy, you started the call off talking
about the inflationary pressures on the consumer. And then later in the call, you touched on maybe there's been a little bit more difficulty
converting customers who have entered the channel and into -- and converting them to tenants.
So I guess just how do you think about the inflationary pressure on the consumer? How is it impacting -- how is it impacting kind of your
trends? Like are customers responding more negatively to rate increases? Are they being more price sensitive when moving in? Or are
they just vacating at a more frequent rate just because of -- because they're spending more money out of food and other things?
 
David G. Cramer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - President, COO & Member of Pro Advisory Committee
Good questions. I'll try to cover as you went through. To your last question, we don't see any change in move-out patterns that have to do
with economic conditions. It's still around need-based. And so as you think about when the time is up, the time is up for them. If you rent
at a store unit because you're remodeling your house and your house is done, you're moving out. We haven't -- and this is through
surveying and through things that we do, we have not seen a significant change in the customer pattern of why they're moving or why
they're moving out.
From an economic perspective, there's a lot of things that have changed. The housing market has cooled off significantly. Would we love
to have a hotter housing market? Yes, in a down housing market, we will still do well. The sector does well. We've proven that we're
recession resilient. But we don't think there's anything around what's happening in the economic conditions right now that's changing
what's going on with our length of stay or our tenant base.
As far as the conversion piece, this is where we have to monitor all of our levers and figure out what's the best trigger point to get people
to convert at the rate we want them to convert at. And that's really more of a use around, I think, right now in this period of time of what's
happening with discounting and what's happening with street rates. There is a lot of the sector that is cutting street rates pretty
dramatically right now. We have not done that. We've always talked about it's a balance between the revenue goal and the revenue goal
is rate, occupancy, concession, all those things in the mix, and we've chosen the path that we've held a little firmer on street rate, held a
little firmer on less discounting, and we're still generating the numbers that we aim to hit.
I think that will change a little bit from the conversion pattern, and we may have to be a little more assertive on street rate and a little
more assertive on discounting.
 
Michael Goldsmith
UBS Investment Bank, Research Division - Associate Director and Associate Analyst
That's helpful, Dave. And my second question is on just kind of the keys of the same-store revenue growth. You reported 10.7% in the
quarter. So that was down sequentially by about 400 basis points. Your guidance at the midpoint implies about a 6% same-store
revenue growth in the fourth quarter which suggests kind of a step up in the slowdown.
So I'm just trying to better understand kind of the cadence of the moderation and how we should think about it going forward. And just
like, I guess, you talked about altering some of the approaches, like how much can -- how much can you effect to slow the moderation
based on kind of this current rate of about 400 basis points sequential deceleration?
 
Brandon S. Togashi
National Storage Affiliates Trust - Executive VP, CFO, CAO & Treasurer
Michael, it's Brandon. So yes, let me try to hit a couple of things you hit on there. Look, I think what's really important to remember is that
the fourth quarter last year was very abnormal for a comp purpose, okay? So pre-pandemic, it would not be uncommon for same-store
revenue from Q3 to Q4, just absolute dollars, to decline 0.5% to 1.5%.
The midpoint of our guide for the full year '22, it implies the fourth quarter is closer to like a 7% growth rate. It has us declining from Q3
right around that level. Last year, the increase from Q3, Q4 was about 2.5%. So that speaks to how challenging that comp is.
So we're not really trying to manage to the comp or the cadence. It's more about just executing on strategy, which Dave spoke to, and the
comp is what it is. So I think another thing that people have done across the sector and for us is just to look at that 2-year stack, and that
moderation is a lot more ratable. It's not as dramatic if that makes sense.
 
Michael Goldsmith
UBS Investment Bank, Research Division - Associate Director and Associate Analyst
No, that does. If I can squeeze one more in. On the topic of property taxes, you've been feeling the pressure from Texas this year. Do you
have any visibility into how property tax may play out in the coming years?
 
Brandon S. Togashi
National Storage Affiliates Trust - Executive VP, CFO, CAO & Treasurer
Coming years is tough, Michael. I mean we'll guide in February. I'll tell you, we start every year with like a 5% to 7% growth rate
assumption. Coming into 2022, we had an average 3-year increase, 2% on total OpEx and an average annual increase on property tax of
2.4%. So we've dodged it the last few years. And so we came into this year with that higher assumption and we're experiencing it.
So you see our numbers for the full year, 9 months, and I think Q4 will be something similar. The comp for property taxes are a little more
challenging. So maybe it comes in for fourth quarter, year-over-year, closer to 8%, but it puts the full year number at something closer to
7%. So the high end of where we would have entered this year was the expectation. We'll update in February about what we're assuming
for the full year '23. But best guess right now is it would be kind of in that 5% to 7% range.
 
Michael Goldsmith
UBS Investment Bank, Research Division - Associate Director and Associate Analyst
Good luck in the fourth quarter.
 
Brandon S. Togashi
National Storage Affiliates Trust - Executive VP, CFO, CAO & Treasurer
Thanks, Michael.
 
Operator
Our next questions come from the line of Wes Golladay with Baird.
 
Wesley Keith Golladay
Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division - Senior Research Analyst
Can you give us your view on supply this year versus next year when you look at it from a weighted average of the impact of your
operations?
 
Tamara D. Fischer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - CEO & Trustee
Sure. I can start, Dave, and Dave and Brandon can jump in. But I think our view of supply this year is that it will -- it has been and it will
remain somewhat muted. I think that for projects that are under construction, they'll go forward, they'll be delivered. But what we're
seeing and hearing from our PROs and from our friends at Yardi is that projects that are not yet approved and certainly, projects that
have not yet secured financing, a very good chance that they will fall out at least for the time being.
So our view on supply is that it will remain muted probably through 2023 and when we'll start looking at potential impact, probably, I
don't know, early to mid-2024, but we'll keep you updated on that. We track that pretty closely, not only with Yardi but with our PROs
who are operating in the markets where we're seeing the potential threat.
 
Wesley Keith Golladay
Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division - Senior Research Analyst
Got it. And then you had the comment earlier, it's an all-cycle business, and it has proven that to be over the last 10, 20 years. But if you
can maybe comment on some of the cyclical demand that may be abating. And then are you seeing the countercyclical demand pickup at
the moment?
 
David G. Cramer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - President, COO & Member of Pro Advisory Committee
Yes. I think as we talked about, maybe the housing markets cooled off, will there be other factors that pick up on that? And we are. I
mean I think the hard part for us is we're coming off something that was historic. And you look at -- you're coming off a pandemic, which
we navigated very nicely through. We obviously had a lot, a lot of success as the pandemic matured and went through the cycle if we just
-- the self-storage sector and ourselves had unbelievable highs. And now we're heading into this uncharted waters of tough economic
conditions and certainly maybe looking down the barrel of a recession.
And so I think all things will continue to play out. If the housing market cools off, then the renter market maybe stays longer. People can't
afford as much of a house as they could. What happens with business owners and how much -- we're a pretty nice option versus
warehouse space for business owners and how they look at us. I just think all the things that we've seen through our history will prove out
again that this sector and our business and our portfolio will do well and be recession resilient through what's coming forward for us.
 
Tamara D. Fischer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - CEO & Trustee
Yes, I think that's right, Dave. I mean what we've talked about over the years is that change drives demand. And when one source of
demand dries up, another one seems to flourish and replace it. So that is our view of, I don't know, probably through the next 18 to 24
months is housing.
 
Wesley Keith Golladay
Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division - Senior Research Analyst
Well, if I could get one last one in. Variable debt increased this quarter, and you did have a $200 million loan at a pretty attractive price.
What is the appetite for more variable rate debt? Is it something you want to get down over time through free cash flow, maybe some
dispositions? Rates did move up almost parabolically, so it caught some people off guard, myself included. And so just maybe how are
you going to navigate the variable rate challenge?
 
Brandon S. Togashi
National Storage Affiliates Trust - Executive VP, CFO, CAO & Treasurer
Yes, Wes, this is Brandon. I mean we're at a level that we're comfortable with right now. I don't think you should expect us to go
dramatically higher. I also don't think that exposure is going to get cut to 0 either. In my opening remarks, you heard me mention half of
that our 24% of our total debt is variable rate and half of that is a revolver. So we exclude that because over time, we're going to
replenish that revolver balance with permanent capital, long-term capital, fixed rate debt.
And so when you -- we think about it with and without and when you exclude it, you've got 12% of the rest of our debt, a couple of bank
term loans that we've kept variable. And you're right. I mean rates move sharply. So that will be a short-term headwind. But when things
calm down, there will be opportunity for us to opportunistically raise capital. Like you mentioned, we did during the quarter with a 5%
coupon debt that we placed.
 
Operator
Our next question is coming from the line of Ronald Kamdem with Morgan Stanley.
 
Ronald Kamdem
Morgan Stanley, Research Division - Equity Analyst
Just a couple of quick ones. Just going back to the occupancy but actually mixing in a little bit of the ECRI. When you think about -- can
you just give us a sense of the ECRI intensity over the past couple of quarters as you're sort of watching this occupancy drop? Because I
think your point is that there's a trade-off, and I think what we're trying to figure out is where was sort of the peak ECRI intensity? And
how much does it come off potentially as you've sort of seen occupancy go down, if that makes sense?
 
David G. Cramer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - President, COO & Member of Pro Advisory Committee
Yes, it makes sense. And thanks. And typically, peak, its historical seasonal trends, the peak ECRI activity's really in the summer months.
We have -- there was a couple of months in the summer. I think we mentioned last quarter, May was our most active month where we
had the largest percent increase and the largest percentage of tenants hit.
But if you looked at the third quarter, we kept a very normal cadence. The percent of rate changes, the percentage of rent change to the
customer as far as a dollar amount was very much in line with what we've been seeing over the last 12 to 14 months. And the percentage
of our tenants that we hit in the third quarter was very similar.
It is a balancing act. The team is studying right now what's the percentage of loss that we can attribute to rate increase versus what
customer sentiment is, to what customer appetite is. We've already gone back and instilled some caps. We were looking at percentage of
rate, how many number of rate increases we've given tenants. So we're going back to some of the older practices that allow us to really
dial in our risk or on do we give a tenant a rate increase or not.
But the third quarter remained very steady. We were fairly steady in October. What's to come? We'll have to monitor what the consumer
is telling us. At this point in time, there are nothing that they told us yet that is causing us to shift dramatically. But again, this is stuff
we'll monitor, and it's a big puzzle. And there's a lot to it. So -- but I hope that answers your question.
 
Ronald Kamdem
Morgan Stanley, Research Division - Equity Analyst
Yes. That was super helpful. Just moving on to the next one, it's just on the expense -- same-store NOI expense guidance -- for the
same-store expense guidance, excuse me. I think you mentioned it was higher both because of some property taxes and some
inflationary pressures.
Any chance we could just dig into that and a little bit more color? Like is it half of it is taxes? Half of it is the other? Like how does it break
out? Just any more color on what came in higher than you expected?
 
Brandon S. Togashi
National Storage Affiliates Trust - Executive VP, CFO, CAO & Treasurer
Yes, Ronald. I mean, tax is a big piece, just given it's one of the 2 largest OpEx line items in addition to personnel. So it's coming in closer
to 7% for the full year growth, but we've managed the personnel costs really well, right? A little under 3% growth for the quarter, call it
flat for the 9 months year-over-year. And so those making up almost 60% of our OpEx, they blend out to kind of like a 4% growth
combined for those 2 line items.
So then really, what you have is just those other contributors that I mentioned in my opening remarks. We were seeing the utilities costs
go up in second quarter. So there were some elements of that already baked into our expectations when we talked to you in early August.
But I would say it came in and those costs and the increases in rates came in a little bit higher than we expected 3 months ago. So that
was a contributor to upping the OpEx guide a little bit.
And then on marketing costs, again, we fully expected to increase that spend. I mentioned that it's open. I also think in one of the
questions earlier spoke to the fact that that's going to be elevated again in the fourth quarter, but we pulled on that lever a little bit more
than we might have thought in early August.
So those were a couple of the key items. Credit card processing fees is another one that came in on the margin a little bit higher.
 
Ronald Kamdem
Morgan Stanley, Research Division - Equity Analyst
Great. And then my last one was just when I look at the same-store revenue guidance, it sort of implies sort of a mid-6s growth rate
coming in 4Q, if I'm doing that math correctly. But just trying to -- I think what we're just trying to square the same-store revenue for 4Q
versus the peer set.
How do you guys sort of think about where your portfolio is different from everybody else, right? Is it maybe because others have LA
exposures, you guys don't? Do you think about sort of rent-to-income ratios at all? Like just how do you square sort of what you're seeing
in your markets versus the peers?
 
Brandon S. Togashi
National Storage Affiliates Trust - Executive VP, CFO, CAO & Treasurer
Yes. Ronald, I mean it's hard to speak to the peers because everybody's portfolio has different dynamics. I know that we were the
second-highest in revenue growth in Q4 of last year, right? So that's going to play into the 2-year stack when you do that math on the
comp.
The other thing I would just point to is what I remarked to Michael earlier about the comparable and kind of the abnormality of what we
had last year as well as 2020, where sequentially, same-store revenue grew Q3 to Q4, and that was in part because we were either
gaining occupancy or not trading off that much on occupancy. And that's very unusual.
So if you look at any pre-pandemic year, with occupancy declining Q3 to Q4, as it seasonally does, it would not be uncommon to have
absolute dollar revenue growth decline Q3 to Q4. We didn't have that last year, but we're absolutely expecting it this year, or at least
that's what's implied by the midpoint of the guide.
So I think another way of saying some of this is as I hear you and others remark on what the growth implies, that you're all coming up
with like a 6.3%, a 6.5%, it's actually a 6.9% at our midpoint. And it's the difference between doing kind of the simple quarterly average
math and looking at the raw dollars because of this really challenging comp.
So when you look at the strict specific dollar math, the low point of our revenue guide implies Q4 growth of 5%, the midpoint of 6.9% and
the high end is when we look at it, it's 8.8%. And so that just speaks to the challenging comp that we have or the unusual comp that we
have in the fourth quarter of last year.
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) Our next questions come from the line of Todd Thomas with KeyBanc.
 
Todd Michael Thomas
KeyBanc Capital Markets Inc., Research Division - MD & Senior Equity Research Analyst
Dave or Brandon, maybe, you both pointed out a number of times that occupancy grew last year from 3Q to 4Q and talked about that
tough comp and some of the abnormal seasonality last year. With regards to that 91.4% occupancy data point at the end of October, I'm
curious what the year-over-year spread looks like in occupancy.
And then also, is the change in discounting and promotions and I guess, the change in street rates that you're now implementing, is it
having the intended result? Are you starting to see demand stimulated a little bit more and the expected response?
 
Brandon S. Togashi
National Storage Affiliates Trust - Executive VP, CFO, CAO & Treasurer
Yes, Todd, I'll take the first part, and I'll let Dave speak to the discounting and promotions and success rate on that. So it's about a 450
basis point year-over-year negative on that end of occupancy number that Dave spoke to. And I think just to bridge some of the
commentary that you heard from Tammy and Dave, we -- our low point going into COVID, so late 2019, on same-store occupancy was
right around 87% to 88%.
And for a long while now we've been saying, look, we are going to revert back to a more normal level. But as Dave said at the opening, we
think it's going to stabilize above -- somewhere above maybe 200 basis points, so not completely at 90%.
So I don't want to mischaracterize what we said here. I think even though what Dave said is true, maybe it's gone a little quicker, it's not
that much quicker. I mean our revenue guide at the midpoint stayed the same. But we're not necessarily that surprised by what's
happening in occupancy. We're certainly reacting on a daily basis, but I don't want to mischaracterize some of the comments earlier as if
it was a big surprise to us.
Dave, you want to hit the discounts?
 
David G. Cramer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - President, COO & Member of Pro Advisory Committee
Yes. Trying to work our way through discounts. We talked about third quarter was historic -- it's low, 2.2%. At this time of year, you might
be running closer to 4.5% to 5%. And so I think as we look at as how we navigate the conversion rate that we're after, I think that this
kind of piece is going to step into this place and then where we balance ourselves in the market as far as street rates. I think all those
things contribute.
We purposely held through the third quarter. Contract rate growth was solid. Street rate decline was minimal and that was on purpose.
So this is how our markets react. Again, I think this occupancy headwind compared to last year is a tough drag to get over, but that's not
what we're worried about. We're worried about where we're going with our portfolio and where our portfolio lands.
And we're looking at this not just this quarter to the next quarter, but long term. And so long experience in our markets, long history with
our customers, finding the right balance of all these things to find the revenue number that fits for the markets we operate in.
 
Brandon S. Togashi
National Storage Affiliates Trust - Executive VP, CFO, CAO & Treasurer
And the occupancy headwind, Todd, it's going to be there. I mean just this should be on everyone's screen, it's going to be a negative
comp challenge for certainly in the fourth quarter of this year as well as Q1 of next year. Just until we lap that this kind of abnormal comp.
We really don't lap it until Q2 of next year.
 
Todd Michael Thomas
KeyBanc Capital Markets Inc., Research Division - MD & Senior Equity Research Analyst
Okay. Got it. That's helpful. And then in terms of kind of looking ahead, it's -- clearly, there's a little bit of uncertainty around the macro
and conditions are sort of evolving with regards to the consumer with small business and so forth. I'm just curious, as you kind of think
about budgeting for next year. Are the PROs in the portfolio, are they communicating with you any differently today? Are you -- are they
coming to you looking for a little bit more guidance or vice versa? And maybe, Tammy, can you discuss how you work with your PROs to
set budgets and forecasts and sort of reforecasts, I guess, for the year ahead and really throughout the year a little bit?
 
Tamara D. Fischer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - CEO & Trustee
Sure, sure. We're well into the budgeting process for 2023, Todd. And so the process starts -- it starts toward the middle to the end of the
third quarter. We have regular conversations with our PROs, and this is on a handful of different fronts. So our -- we have a VP of
Financial Planning and Analysis who kind of runs the process, and he stays very close to our PROs and their chief financial person,
whoever that ends up being.
And I would say that what we are hearing from our PROs so far this year is pretty consistent with what we're seeing across our corporate
portfolio. I think communications are -- everybody is cautiously optimistic. Our PROs have been in the business for 20-plus years and
operating in their respective markets. So they understand this as well or better than frankly anybody as far as I'm concerned.
I think that the moderation that we're seeing is not unique to corporate managed stores there. It's really across the country. Some
markets being affected maybe a little more than others. And what we've talked about over the years, Todd, is that because of our broad
geographic diversification, for us, what we see is that when 1 or 2 or 3 markets go down, there are another 3 or 4 or 5 that are
countercyclical and are going up. And I think that will continue to be true for us.
The communication, just generally speaking, communications with our PROs, happens at a lot of different levels, but in terms of the
principles, we have a Monday afternoon touch point meeting that we've had, I don't know, every Monday barring travel and other things
going on like we might be releasing earnings or something. We have a Monday call with the PROs. And then once a quarter, at least, we
do a deep dive with each PRO. So that's not a big group call, but rather, a deep dive on the PROs' performance, what they're seeing in
the market, what they're seeing with new supply and what their expectations are, both short term and a little bit longer term.
So I think -- oh yes, Dave just mentioned to me. And then we also have a biweekly operations meeting, so the operations leads are
staying in touch on what they're seeing in their markets and best operating practices. So -- and then we have an annual meeting where
we bring everybody together and you probably didn't even want to know that much. But yes.
 
Todd Michael Thomas
KeyBanc Capital Markets Inc., Research Division - MD & Senior Equity Research Analyst
Sorry. Go ahead.
 
Tamara D. Fischer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - CEO & Trustee
Oh no. I was really just wrapping it up. I was just saying, I think that the communication is frequent and thorough and continues to be, I
think, very productive and collaborative. So...
 
Todd Michael Thomas
KeyBanc Capital Markets Inc., Research Division - MD & Senior Equity Research Analyst
Okay. But I guess I'm also wondering how much input do you have on the budgets that they're setting for the year? Or alternatively, do
you take their budgets and as you kind of wrap them up or roll them up to sort of the corporate or to the REIT's forecast for the year, how
much work do you do on their budgets?
 
David G. Cramer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - President, COO & Member of Pro Advisory Committee
Good question. And so the answer to that is we have a software that we set up all the parameters, and we set up all the historicals on
and we -- actually, it has the ability to make changes through line items. We let them take a first stab at it. We come back in. So it's a
bottom-up approach.
We solicit feedback and then we get heavily involved in it. We look at markets that we have overlap expectations. We certainly have a
goal in our mind where we would like to land next year, and that plays into that budgeting process as well.
So it's collaborative. Yes, there are some pushing and talking and negotiations that go along in that process. And so lots of experience,
lots of great minds working on it, but definitely, we are involved in the budget process.
 
Tamara D. Fischer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - CEO & Trustee
And from my experience, the way we run it is not very different from other companies that I've been involved with, in terms of where it
starts and how it builds up and then eventually, we know who the sandbaggers are, and we know the guys who are being out there
putting their maybe strongest foot forward. And so we push. We push and we pull and
 
David G. Cramer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - President, COO & Member of Pro Advisory Committee
You call me a sandbagger?
 
Tamara D. Fischer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - CEO & Trustee
Sandbagger in charge.
 
Todd Michael Thomas
KeyBanc Capital Markets Inc., Research Division - MD & Senior Equity Research Analyst
All right. No, that's helpful. And just one last one real quick on the transaction environment. I realize that you're expecting activity to be
slow here near term, and that makes sense. There's some volatility around asset pricing and in the capital markets. But I just wanted to
ask about the captive pipeline, which I think stood at around $1.5 billion, maybe slightly higher. What's the status of that pipeline today?
And how should we think about investments from the captive pipeline and just what the PROs will look to do given the current lending
environment when you sort of put it all together? Because I believe a lot of those acquisitions from the captive pipeline were sort of
expected to take place alongside debt maturities and other capital markets-related activity or recap.
So just curious what we should be thinking about there just given where interest rates are and the lending environment and so forth?
 
Tamara D. Fischer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - CEO & Trustee
I don't think we'll see too much of a change in [chains] because of the capital markets. The assets that have financing on them, that's
already there. And there may be a little bit of an acceleration with a handful of our PROs who are developing assets. And as those assets
approach stabilization and they're looking for whether they get contributed or permanent financing until they reach full stabilization. I
don't know the answer to that yet. We -- but our cost of capital has gone up, too. So that resets pricing and expectations on that side.
But I think it will remain a solid opportunity for us to maintain an acquisition pace for off-market acquisitions at good prices with our
PROs and assets that are high quality in markets where we're currently operating.
So it may accelerate a bit. I don't have line of sight on that yet, but I think it's a good bet that we'll see some assets ahead of where we
might have otherwise in 2023.
 
Operator
Our next question is come from the line of Steve Sakwa with Evercore ISI.
 
Unidentified Analyst
Hey team, this is [Laura] with Steve from Evercore. I just have a quick follow-up question. So geographically and demographically, your
customers are relatively more sensitive to informed national rate pressures and pertaining to this feature, I guess what's the -- how is the
bad debt is trending so far? And what's your expectations of the bad debt levels through year-end and towards '23?
 
David G. Cramer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - President, COO & Member of Pro Advisory Committee
Yes. Yes. Thanks for the question. Good question. Bad debt has certainly returned to pre-pandemic levels and returned really in the third
-- it started in the second quarter and really returned in the third quarter. So the teams are having to work really hard on collections as
far as back to what normal sequences would be.
We're seeing more units at auction. The processes of those things are back to what we would see levels of 2019. Is it concerning us? No,
not at this point. These are levels that we're used to operating under. And that's not everywhere. We have markets that are a little --
could be a little higher than that and markets a little bit lower than that. But as a whole, it's returned to average. But again, no concern
at this point.
 
Unidentified Analyst
Okay. And is there any certain levels that makes you such a bit cautious on rate growth and maybe try to start to manage the occupancy?
 
David G. Cramer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - President, COO & Member of Pro Advisory Committee
So I think we tried to talk through it. Certainly, occupancy is a piece of this. And we are looking at how and where we want to land
throughout all of our markets. We certainly, in the third quarter, looked at marketing spend and the only reason you'd look at marketing
spend is you wanted to drive more move-in activity. We're going to look at where versus fee rates and discounting. So yes, that is a part of
the piece of the puzzle.
There will be some markets that we will certainly react a little bit harder if we want to drive some more occupancy, and we think that's
the right revenue math problem. And so that's what we would work on.
We also have markets that are performing very well that we're going back into and say, can we drive a couple more points of occupancy,
markets that are performing very well. So it's not always a negative thing. We're trying to balance all these pieces where we spend our
money, how we use rates, how we use discounting. But certainly, on our mind about where we balance and where we finish.
 
Operator
There are no further questions at this time. I'd now like to hand the call back over to Tamara Fischer for any closing comments.
 
Tamara D. Fischer
National Storage Affiliates Trust - CEO & Trustee
Well, thanks, everyone, for your time today and for your interest in and support of NSA.
Even with moderating fundamentals and tough comps, we had a great third quarter, and we're very optimistic about the rest of the year
and into 2023.
As I mentioned earlier, self-storage has demonstrated its resilience in challenging economic times and is one of the best, perhaps the
best performing property type over the past 25 years.
We look forward to seeing many of you in San Francisco in a couple of weeks. Thanks, and have a great day.
 
Operator
Thank you. This does conclude today's teleconference. You may disconnect your lines at this time. Thank you for your participation. Enjoy
the rest of your day.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.