CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
Kenneth A. Gunderman
Uniti Group Inc. - President, CEO & Director
 
Paul Bullington
Uniti Group Inc. - Senior VP, CFO & Treasurer
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
David William Barden
BofA Securities, Research Division - MD
 
Frank Garrett Louthan
Raymond James & Associates, Inc., Research Division - MD of Equity Research
 
Gregory Bradford Williams
Cowen and Company, LLC, Research Division - Director
 
Michael Ian Rollins
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - MD & U.S. Telecoms Analyst
 
Simon William Flannery
Morgan Stanley, Research Division - MD
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Welcome to Uniti Group's Third Quarter 2022 Conference Call. My name is Gigi, and I'll be your operator for today. A webcast of this call
will be available on the company's website www.uniti.com, beginning today and will remain available for 14 days.
Forward-looking statement disclaimer. The company would like to remind you that today's remarks include forward-looking statements
and actual results could differ materially from those projected in these statements. The factors that could cause actual results to differ
are discussed in the company's filings with the SEC.
The company's remarks this morning will reference slides posted on its website and you are encouraged to refer to those materials
during this call. Discussions during the call will also include certain financial measures that were not prepared in accordance with
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles. Reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable GAAP
financial measures can be found in the company's current report on Form 8-K dated today.
I would now like to turn the call over to Uniti Group's Chief Executive Officer, Kenny Gunderman. Please go ahead, Mr. Gunderman.
 
Kenneth A. Gunderman
Uniti Group Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Thank you. Good morning, everyone. Starting on Slide 3. Our results for the third quarter were once again strong as the demand for our
mission-critical fiber infrastructure continues to grow. We achieved our sixth consecutive quarter of elevated new sales bookings, which
we now consider the new norm. As importantly, we also had another strong quarter of gross install activity with a mean time to deliver of
less than 100 days.
Consistent bookings balanced between anchor and lease-up along with installs that can be turned up quickly in our industry-leading
monthly churn of 0.2% demonstrate that our strategy is sound and that we're executing on it well. To reiterate, our strategy continues to
focus on buying and building mission-critical fiber infrastructure and then leasing infrastructure to anchor customers in the 5% to 10%
cash yield range and additional lease-up customers, driving cumulative cash yields above 10%.
This strategy has resulted in Uniti becoming the second largest independent fiber operator in the country with 134,000 route miles and a
long runway for profitable growth.
As Slide 4 demonstrates, Uniti continues to track well on these shared infrastructure economics. We're building new fiber largely for our
wireless customers and then successfully adding additional tenants with very high margins and minimal CapEx, resulting in a cumulative
cash flow yield today of 22%, a more than threefold increase from the anchor yield on these projects.
Slide 5 illustrates that the majority of new bookings continue to be lease-up in nature. And along with our intentional focus of balancing
wholesale, non-wholesale and anchor lease-up opportunities, has resulted in outsized margin enhancement, AFFO growth and a
business that remains relatively immune to swings in the economy.
Turning to Slide 6. High-capacity long-haul routes are needed by all of our customers, including wireless carriers, hyperscalers,
international carriers, MSOs and large enterprises to connect their disparate markets, data centers and PoPs. Today, dark fiber in North
America is an approximately $1.5 billion annual market opportunity and is expected to grow about 10% annually over the next several
years.
A growing component of our wholesale strategy is wavelength services, which represent a $2 billion annual revenue opportunity today in
North America and is expected to grow approximately 7% over the next several years. We're selectively lighting more long-haul routes to
provide wave services and capitalize on growing demand while maintaining the same discipline on anchor and lease-up economics.
For example, we recently announced 2 new long-haul routes that will offer wavelength services and multiple terabit spectrum services to
key markets in our Southeast footprint. This is in addition to our previously announced Miami to Tampa route. The anchor cash yields are
approximately 10% and we have a clear line of sight to a combined cash yield of low to mid-teens once leased up over the next few years.
Having an own national network is a meaningful competitive advantage for Uniti, especially given that it would take billions of dollars
and many years to build a new national network. We estimate there are only 5 truly owned national networks and 2 independent fiber
providers with national networks in the U.S. today, with Uniti being one of them. Thus, our ability to deploy dark fiber and wave services
present Uniti with a unique growth opportunity with minimal competition.
The resulting economics of our national wholesale business are very attractive with high margin, passively managed revenue, virtually no
churn, long-term contracts that routinely have escalators built into them and minimal CapEx requirements.
Before turning to our enterprise business, I'd like to comment briefly on lit wireless backhaul. Lit backhaul is a terrific way to lease up
existing network or build new network with attractive yields for wireless carriers. However, the contract lengths are typically shorter than
that of dark fiber and there's some pricing pressure on returns.
As such, Uniti has always considered managing return risk as a strategic imperative and we manage that risk by offsetting reterm
discounts with lease-up on the networks, additional business from the wireless carriers and upselling bandwidth. As an example of this
focus, today we're announcing that we recently retermed approximately 1,100 lit backhaul sites with one of our major wireless customers
resulting in a net price increase of approximately 20% as we upgrade these sites to 10 gig, and we're extending the contract term from a
blended 2.5 years remaining to 8 years remaining.
We're actively working with another of our major wireless carriers to reterm an additional 1,200 lit backhaul sites. Together these 2
agreements represent over 60% of our existing lit backhaul portfolio and provide stability and increased visibility for our earnings going
forward.
Now turning to Slide 7. Although enterprise sales represent less than 5% of our total revenue today and will likely always represent a
minority percentage, it remains a critical element of our lease-up strategy. Enterprise new sales bookings and install activity during the
third quarter were again both very strong. And we expect these trends to continue as we further capture market share in our existing and
new metro markets. As a result of our consistently strong bookings activity, enterprise recurring revenue was up 16% during the quarter.
Slide 8 is an example of how we're executing to increase market share in markets with existing fiber and where we're currently offering lit
services. Birmingham is the largest metro area in Alabama and the 50th largest metropolitan statistical area in the U.S. It's a very
attractive Tier 2 market which we originally entered in 2017 with a large greenfield build. Today we have an extensive fiber network there
with almost 27,000 strand miles of dense fiber. And despite our growth over the years, our enterprise market share is still only
approximately 5%. Homewood is an affluent neighborhood of Birmingham. And for less than $1 million of capital, we can expand our
already robust network to reach an additional 600 attractive enterprise customers.
These investments not only expand our market share, but will result in very attractive economics for Uniti, resulting in cumulative cash
yields of approximately 50% and IRRs of 30%. These type of investments are only available to providers like Uniti with an extensive
network already in place.
Equally exciting and as we've mentioned before, we own metro fiber in nearly 300 markets nationwide which represents terrific capital
and margin-efficient growth potential for enterprise, wireless backhaul and even small cells. We only recently acquired most of these
markets on our 2020 settlement with Windstream. So we're just beginning to capitalize on the opportunity.
Given the proven success of our anchor and lease-up strategies and the attractive economics of these enterprise opportunities, with
payback periods of almost half the initial contract term and cash yields of 50% plus, we continue to actively prioritize these metro
markets for expansion in both 2023 and beyond.
In looking at our national wholesale network and our 300 metro markets combined, we estimate that less than 5% of our total 8 million
strand miles of fiber are actually lit. This virtual blank canvas provides us with a terrific runway for disciplined growth without the burden
of legacy declining products.
With that I'll now turn the call over to Paul.
 
Paul Bullington
Uniti Group Inc. - Senior VP, CFO & Treasurer
Thank you, Kenny and good morning, everyone. We are once again pleased with how our businesses performed during the quarter, with
robust booking and install levels driving in-line consolidated revenue and better-than-expected adjusted EBITDA.
While non-recurring revenue at Uniti Fiber was lower than expected during the quarter, recurring revenue both at Uniti Fiber and Uniti
Leasing was strong. Uniti remains well positioned to weather current macroeconomic conditions, given our robust level of long-term
revenues under contract, our declining capital intensity and the work we have done to strengthen our balance sheet and push out our
debt maturities.
As a result of the strength of the quarter and our expectations for the fourth quarter, we are increasing the midpoint of our 2022 outlook
for consolidated revenue and adjusted EBITDA.
Please turn to Slide 9 and I'll start with comments on our third quarter. We reported consolidated revenues of $283 million, consolidated
adjusted EBITDA of $225 million, AFFO attributed to common shares of $112 million and AFFO per diluted common share of $0.43. Net
loss attributable to common shares for the quarter was approximately $156 million or $0.66 per diluted share which includes a $216
million goodwill impairment charge related to our Uniti Fiber segment that was driven by an increase in the macro interest rate
environment.
At Uniti Leasing, we reported segment revenues of $209 million and adjusted EBITDA of $203 million, both of which were up 5% from
the prior year. Accordingly, Uniti Leasing achieved an adjusted EBITDA margin of 97% for the quarter.
Turning to Slide 10. Our growth capital investment program continues to provide positive results for Uniti. Over the past 6 years, our
tenant has invested approximately $1 billion of tenant capital improvements in our network. Uniti continues to invest its own capital in
long-term value accretive fiber, largely focused on highly valuable last-mile fiber, including fiber in commercial parks and
fiber-to-the-home.
Collectively, these investments have resulted in 18,800 route miles of newly constructed fiber and 23% of the legacy copper network
being overbuilt with fiber. Based on the investments made to date and our expectation that Windstream will utilize most, if not all, of the
GCI program, we expect that nearly half of the legacy copper network will be overbuilt with fiber by 2030.
During the third quarter, Uniti Leasing deployed approximately $72 million towards growth capital investment initiatives, with the
majority of the investments relating to the Windstream GCI program. These GCI investments added 2,250 route miles of fiber to Uniti's
own network across several different markets.
As of September 30, Uniti has invested approximately $460 million of capital to date under the GCI program with Windstream, adding
around 13,500 route miles and 731,000 strand miles of fiber to our network. These investments will be added to the master leases at an
8% initial yield at the 1-year anniversary of Uniti making such investment. They are subject to a 0.5% annual escalator and result in
nearly 100% margin.
The investments we have made to date will ultimately generate approximately $38 million of annualized cash rent and increase the
overall value of our network. At Uniti Fiber, we turned over almost 300 lit backhaul, dark fiber and small cell sites for our wireless carriers
across our Southeast footprint during the third quarter. These installs add annualized revenues of approximately $3 million. We currently
have around 1,200 lit backhaul, dark fiber and small cell sites remaining in our backlog that we expect to deploy over the next few years.
This wireless backlog represents an incremental $11.5 million of annualized revenues.
At Uniti Fiber, we reported revenues of $74 million and adjusted EBITDA of $29 million during the third quarter. Revenues were lower
than expected due to lower non-recurring equipment sales and installs resulting from several factors, including the timing of those sales,
a modest impact from delivery delays and key employee turnover within our E-Rate Group. However, adjusted EBITDA was slightly
higher than expected given the low margin nature of the equipment sales combined with lower-than-expected costs.
Uniti Fiber net success-based CapEx was $26 million in the third quarter. We also incurred $2 million of maintenance CapEx or about 3%
of revenues.
Please turn to Slide 11 and I will now cover our updated 2022 guidance. We are revising our guidance primarily for business unit level
revisions and the impact of transaction-related and other costs incurred to date. Our outlook excludes future acquisitions, capital market
transactions and future transaction-related and other costs not specifically mentioned herein. Actual results could differ materially from
these forward-looking statements.
Our current full year outlook for 2022 includes the following for each segment. Beginning with Uniti Leasing, based on our continued
strong lease-up success, we now expect revenues and adjusted EBITDA to be $827 million and $805 million respectively at the midpoint,
representing adjusted EBITDA margins of approximately 97%.
Revenue and adjusted EBITDA each include $14 million of cash rent associated with the GCI investments and $25 million related to the
straight-line rent associated with the Windstream master leases and GCI investments. We still expect to deploy $275 million of
success-based CapEx at the midpoint of our guidance, of which $250 million relates to estimated Windstream GCI investments.
Turning to Slide 12. We now expect Uniti Fiber to contribute $305 million of revenue at the midpoint, given the factors I mentioned earlier
that are impacting our non-recurring revenue. However, we are increasing the midpoint of our full year recurring revenue outlook on the
strong bookings and install activity we continue to see.
Our full year outlook for adjusted EBITDA remains $121 million with a lower non-recurring revenue offset by higher recurring revenue and
lower costs. When adjusting for the Everstream transaction that occurred in May of 2021, the year-over-year revenue and adjusted
EBITDA growth is 5% and 8%, respectively.
This strong growth demonstrates our continued success in managing our cost structure and improving margins while executing on
lease-up that leverages our existing dense Southeast fiber footprint.
As I mentioned last quarter, we expect 2022 to be the peak year for Sprint-related churn. As a reminder, as we turn to 2023, we still
expect to realize some ETL fees, but most likely $12 million to $13 million less than what we recognized in 2022.
We also still expect that our core recurring revenue at Uniti Fiber will increase by a mid-single digit percentage rate for full year 2023
when compared to 2022. Net success-based CapEx for Uniti Fiber this year is expected to be $120 million at the midpoint of our
guidance, a 12% decrease from levels in 2021.
Turning to Slide 13. For 2022 we still expect full year AFFO to range between $1.70 and $1.77 per diluted common share with a midpoint
of $1.74 per diluted share, a 4% increase from 2021. On a consolidated basis, we expect revenues to be $1.1 billion and adjusted EBITDA
to be $900 million at the midpoint.
Our guidance contemplates consolidated interest expense for the full year of approximately $390 million. Corporate SG&A, excluding
amounts allocated to our business segments is expected to be approximately $34 million, including $8 million of stock-based
compensation expense. We still expect our weighted average diluted common shares outstanding for full year 2022 to be around 267
million shares. As a reminder, guidance ranges for key components of our outlook are included in the appendix to our presentation.
Turning now to our capital structure. Given the current macroeconomic and interest rate environment, we will continue to be
opportunistic in our approach to managing our capital structure over the near term.
At quarter end, we had approximately $270 million of combined unrestricted cash and cash equivalents and undrawn revolver capacity.
Our leverage ratio stood at 5.80x based on net debt to last quarter annualized adjusted EBITDA. On November 1, our Board declared a
dividend of $0.15 per share to stockholders of record on December 16, payable December 30.
With that, I'll now turn the call back over to Kenny.
 
Kenneth A. Gunderman
Uniti Group Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Thanks, Paul. We continue to believe that our core business will likely see little to no noticeable impact from any economic downturn
given the mission-critical nature of broadband. Further, the vast majority of our revenue is wholesale in nature with long-term contracts.
Lastly, 95% of our debt is fixed rate, and we have no significant near-term maturities. So as it relates to potential debt refinancing in
M&A, we have the ability to be patient. Our strategy since 2015 has been to acquire and build mission-critical communications
infrastructure and then lease that infrastructure to quality anchor customers with a clear path to lease up, resulting in combined cash
yields of 10% plus.
While in our early years, our priority was more focused on acquiring rather than building as we established our national fiber platform.
We're now much more focused on building given the attractive returns we're seeing in the challenging economic and capital markets
backdrop.
We believe our strategy is working, and the initial investments both in M&A and Greenfield bills are paying off. We currently have over $7
billion of revenue under contract with an average remaining term of approximately 8 years. The majority of this revenue is passively
managed in the form of triple net or dark fiber MLAs. As a result, the operating costs associated with this revenue is very predictable,
which results in a cash flow-rich business over the mid to long term.
By 2030, we expect to have generated approximately $1.5 billion of cumulative free cash flow if we maintain our current dividend and
approximate level of annual capital investment. This trajectory leads to substantial deleveraging, resulting in 2.5x to 3.5x net leverage
and more than doubling the size of our fiber business.
Our network is highly underutilized, presenting profitable growth potential for some time. We expect net capital intensity to decline from
our current level of approximately 35% to 5% to 10% by 2030 and is indicative of accelerating operating leverage in the business and
many years of high margin and high-yielding lease-up, including dark fiber, lighting unique long-haul routes and expanding deeper into
our existing 300 metro markets.
With that said, our cash rich MLAs provide great optionality to pay an increasing dividend and invest even more in our core business in
lieu of paying down debt. Regardless of our capital allocation policy, our runway for organic growth appears long and fruitful, especially
given strong industry tailwinds.
With that operator, we're now ready to take questions.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) Our first question comes from the line of David Barden from Bank of America.
 
David William Barden
BofA Securities, Research Division - MD
Kenny, can you -- you've got a banking background. Can you talk a little bit about where we sit now with the sale-lease back business,
where every incremental capital dollar you're putting to work kind of generates an 8% return day 1, but your bonds are yielding 9% to
13%, presumably that's the cheapest part of your capital structure, your equity is going to be more expensive. So your cost of capital is a
lot higher than the yield that you're generating at the margin in this business. How do we think about resolving that as an investable
thesis? And then just second on the fiber business itself. Again, the inevitable question is the transformational transaction out there
that's going to unlock the value that you guys see in this fiber business, is that practically doable in the current market climate, kind of
with the rates going where they are and the recession coming? How do you convince people that that's still a thing that can be done?
 
Kenneth A. Gunderman
Uniti Group Inc. - President, CEO & Director
David, yes, on your first question, I think you're right. I mean, generally in the 5 -- you're right about part of what you said. Generally, in
our anchor yields, whether it's sale-leasebacks or greenfield bills or any other anchor type agreements are in the 5% to 10% range, as you
mentioned 8%. So that's kind of at the higher end of that range. That's been our -- part of our -- true north if you will, for many years,
kind of sticking to that range. But importantly, then through lease-up you're getting well above 10% yields. And the second page in our
materials consistently is where are we tracking on that? Well, we're tracking at 22% cash yields as a result.
So yes, there are different projects that are at different stages of maturity along the way. But on an aggregate basis, our core business is
returning 22% yields, and frankly those are going higher. And I see every day a dashboard of yields that are being generated from our
CapEx and they're very attractive, you know, 50%-plus yields. So with respect to what could be a temporarily high interest rate
environment, I agree with you, you know, you're looking at high single digits, low double digits in terms of some of the yields that are out
there. But we're still hurdling those comfortably with our core business. I don't see that changing.
With respect to your second question, we're really trying to get away from this quarter-to-quarter play-by-play on M&A. It's just not
constructive. But look, I do think that in these types -- and I'll put the old banker hat back on. In these types of environments there's 2, 3
different types of counterparties out there. One is those that just go into bunker mode and one that do nothing, the fetal position if you
will and there's no criticism of that.
The other is counterparties who look to take advantage of forced sellers or forced buyers and we call them bottom feeders, people who
are just looking to be -- take advantage and frankly, we're not engaging with parties like that and frankly, I never have. But thirdly, there
are parties who are much more savvy, who have a lot of capital -- and make no mistake, despite the market backdrop, there is a lot of
equity capital and debt capital sitting on the sidelines looking to be put to work, whether that be in public securities or private. And a lot
of it is out there earmarked for digital infrastructure. And so there's a huge opportunity out there. There are savvy, sophisticated
counterparties who look at situations like this as an opportunity to engage in more creative structures or in more bespoke type
transactions. And you're seeing some of those deals happen. And we saw a deal a few days ago, one of the large funds that did a large
transaction and basically spoke for the debt financing themselves as opposed to relying upon the public markets.
So look, opportunities are out there.
I think one thing we've proven -- hopefully, we've proven in our history in doing M&A is that we're able to execute on down the fairway
cash acquisitions and we've also executed on mergers, we've executed on much more creative type transactions and that's never going to
be -- never not going to be a part of our DNA. But I also think very strongly and our Board thinks very strongly that having the ability to be
patient in M&A is critical because being a forced buyer or a forced seller almost always results in a subpar outcome. And for us, every day
we're executing on a business that's generating, we think terrific returns. We think it's a business that is highly valued especially in the
private market. And with that execution and the platform, we think we're creating value every day and it affords us the ability to be
patient for what could be value-accretive M&A either in the near term or longer term.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from the line of Gregory Williams from Cowen.
 
Gregory Bradford Williams
Cowen and Company, LLC, Research Division - Director
Just first one you mentioned Kenny, about expansion to eventually the 300 markets you're in. Do you have a sort of cadence on how
many markets you'd expand per quarter or per year that would be helpful. Second question is just, if you're seeing any labor supply or
inflation concerns on the business just in the last 2 days, we heard Lumen talk about slowing down on their fiber enablement to their
homes and the day before that I think Consolidated said their cost per home pass is coming up a little bit. I'm wondering if you're seeing
that broadly or maybe more particularly in the Windstream fabric of the home space?
 
Kenneth A. Gunderman
Uniti Group Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Greg, I'll let Paul comment on some of the second part of the question. But on the first part, yes, we're actively looking at all of our metro
markets and prioritizing. I don't have something we're ready to roll out yet in terms of the cadence. I think probably in February we'll have
a little more color on that. But the reality is and part of the reason we picked one of our markets, in this case Birmingham and showed
some of the investment opportunity in that market, that's a terrific market for us. And it's right down the fairway for being a Tier 2
market, not a lot of competition there. We've been in there since 2017 with an anchor award and we've been chipping away at enterprise
market share now for 4 or 5 years and we're still only at 5%.
And we've got these just what I characterize as low-hanging fruit investment opportunities in those existing markets. So we mentioned
being able to expand into the Homewood neighborhood for less than $1 million. But the reality is that's -- when you really peel back the
onion, it's spending a couple of hundred thousand dollars to expand the backbone and then the rest of that is just all success-based to
light up new customers. And the returns on that capital back to the earlier question are just terrific. It's very high yielding returns without
a lot of incremental OpEx because we already have people on the ground there, we've got salespeople, operations, people, et cetera.
So all that to say, the near-term opportunities for us on market expansion are building out existing markets as opposed to in the near
term at least, expanding into brand new markets. We have a robust fiber network in Little Rock, for example, and today we're not offering
any enterprise services, but we're a wholesale provider here. We're providing wholesale to 3 or 4 additional carriers. And so while we're
focusing enterprise on more of the Southeastern markets and eventually we'll start to expand that footprint. In the meantime, we're
getting really nice returns on some of these other metro markets through dark fiber sales or just wholesale in general. And so I think it's
just a real nice way for our Uniti Fiber and Uniti Leasing businesses to be complementing each other.
With respect to the supply side, I think that we are feeling some pressure like we've said, generally on the labor side, finding -- in order to
keep crews fully staffed and even our quota-bearing -- number of quota-bearing reps is down. I mean, we're hitting all of our targets and
exceeding our targets on bookings. But the reality is our number of enterprise sales reps is down something like 15% or 20% compared to
our plan. So the silver lining in that is we're still hitting our bookings numbers because our existing reps are more productive, but we're
still behind plan. And frankly, we'd be doing a lot better if we could keep that fully staffed. But that's just day-to-day blocking and
tackling.
I think with respect to pricing pressure or cost increasing, I mean, Paul, you can comment. But we're seeing some of that, but not huge.
 
Paul Bullington
Uniti Group Inc. - Senior VP, CFO & Treasurer
Yes. No, I agree with that comment, Kenny. I mean it is obviously a very tight labor supply market out there. But in terms of our -- the
construction of our network, the labor that we rely on to construct our network, we use primarily a contractor labor force to build that
network and we really have not seen to date any market increase in the costs we are paying for labor and our construction -- in the
construction part of our business. And I attribute that to a few things. One, we have a deep bench of contractors that are focused really
primarily in one region in the Southeast. We have a really steady, consistent supply of work and we have a very robust competitive
bidding system for those -- for all of those jobs. And I think those factors together have helped to keep those costs stable for us, which
doesn't mean that we're completely immune from rising labor costs there either. But to date, we really have not seen any material
increase in the labor piece of the cost of construction.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from the line of Frank Louthan from Raymond James.
 
Frank Garrett Louthan
Raymond James & Associates, Inc., Research Division - MD of Equity Research
So pretty material downtick there in the quota-bearing heads. Where are you losing folks to and do you think you can get that back up
and maybe expand that? And is there any concern for the outlook for next year with the base going down that much?
 
Kenneth A. Gunderman
Uniti Group Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Yes, Frank, no concern about next year. I think again the real takeaway from that is a positive one in the sense that we're still hitting our
numbers because our existing reps are more productive and we just have so much opportunity to monetize the network going back to
some of the slides in our prepared remarks. With that said, yes, we're very focused on getting that number higher. And look, if you go
back in our history over the past couple -- 3 years, we've always struggled to keep that number where we want it to be. And part of the
reason for that is we're very -- our team is very selective on adding new reps. And once we get those reps on board, we're also very
proactive about churning out reps who are not productive. I think our -- I can't remember exactly, but I think our churn rate is something
like 20% on reps who aren't productive.
So we don't -- you know, I don't consider it a problem or a leading indicator of a problem that that number is lower. But at the same time,
yes, we're constantly looking to add new quality reps. We're always looking for ways to tweak our existing commission plan or
compensation plan or otherwise in order to do that. But at the same time, we're not going to move away from the discipline and the rigor
that we apply to holding those reps accountable and productive. And at the end of the day, I think if we wanted to just hit a number for a
number of reps, we could do that. But that's not what we're going to do.
 
Frank Garrett Louthan
Raymond James & Associates, Inc., Research Division - MD of Equity Research
Sure. Okay. And to follow up on a previous question is, do you think Windstream is having any issues in getting trucks or equipment or so
forth to hit their build plans and any chance they would stretch their build plans out due to increased costs?
 
Kenneth A. Gunderman
Uniti Group Inc. - President, CEO & Director
So Frank, we have an opinion on that, but we're going to let them address that. I think they've got an earnings call coming up, so we'll let
them address that directly.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from the line of Simon Flannery from Morgan Stanley.
 
Simon William Flannery
Morgan Stanley, Research Division - MD
On the fiber business, I think Kenny you did talk about capital intensity coming down over time, but also you've got this nice backlog
here. So how should we think about near-term capital intensity? You're still over that 40% level this year. Is that going to come down to
that sort of mid-30s you've talked about over the next year or 2?
And any update on DISH? I think you sort of said that they hope -- you hope that as the Sprint business came off, that DISH would start to
kick in in '23. Any updated clarity on what their plans are?
 
Kenneth A. Gunderman
Uniti Group Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Okay. Simon. Yes, our capital intensity is going to come down. So nothing new or no changes to any forward-looking guidance we've
given there. I think the reality is -- I mean, part of what we're trying to show in some of our materials is just where our capital is being
invested and how we're getting the good returns that we're getting. And as I said, the yields that we're getting on the capital is actually
better than we've been forecasting. So theoretically, we could spend less capital and get the same returns. And so, we're looking for ways
to spend the capital, always looking for ways to spend the capital more efficiently, get the highest returns, and so that's not going to
change. But with respect to the trajectory of the capital intensity coming down, that isn't going to change.
DISH, continue to make great strides with DISH. When we first started talking about DISH and Sprint a couple of years ago, I think we
said there would be some Sprint churn. I think we said it would probably be in the $5 million to $10 million recurring revenue range that
we would lose and that we thought that DISH would eventually replace that and more. And in the meantime there would be some pretty
lumpy ETL fees to sort of smooth that transition. And in hindsight, I think that is playing out as we expected. The Sprint churn is on track
with high ETLs this year, dropping off a little bit next year and DISH has really been ramping up. And I think we will more than hurdle
that $5 million to $10 million on this lost Sprint churn with DISH, with the business that we have already turned up or that we have in the
backlog. And again, I think going forward over the longer term, it's -- we think there's a really attractive opportunity for us.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from the line of Michael Rollins from Citi.
 
Michael Ian Rollins
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - MD & U.S. Telecoms Analyst
Just a strategic question. As you think of the fiber portfolio and if you think about communications infrastructure more broadly, there are
business models in this category that it really doesn't matter how big the portfolio is. If the local asset is the right asset, it tends to get
sales. Yet there's other portfolios like data centers where there's been a nice cross-sell. The larger the portfolio is, it seems like there's
been this natural benefit for that. How would you describe fiber infrastructure in that? Is it one that benefits from being part of a larger
portfolio or is it the, you know, if you have the right assets, the right location, you have a great chance of getting the win? And then how
does that instruct the type of strategic aspirations that you have for Uniti over a multiyear period?
 
Kenneth A. Gunderman
Uniti Group Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Scale does matter in fiber. I think that especially on the wholesale side, the national network (technical difficulty) when you have a
national network, you're in a very different class of providers and your ability to have conversations with large carriers, the data center
providers, the hyperscalers, you're just in a different class because they need national network. And from our vantage point, when you
look at our national strategic accounts business today versus what it looked like a year or 2 ago, it's changed dramatically to the point
where it just kind of rolls off the tongue that we're having conversations with the hyperscalers. I won't use any specific names. But we're
just in a different category with respect to those types of conversations and therefore, the business opportunity that it presents. And so
our Leasing business is growing at 10%, 15%, 20% a year as a result with very high margins and great returns. And it also, you know,
having that national network provides you with the ability to have more bespoke-type transactions and conversations.
And we mentioned the lit backhaul reterm that we just signed, that's 1,100 sites. There aren't very many people that have that many sites
with each of the carriers. And when you have that many sites and you have the capital available and the brand to deliver 10 gig, that puts
you again on a different plan. And extending a lit backhaul contract from 2.5 years to 8 years is a big deal and that's why we called it out.
But you don't get those types of opportunities unless you have real scale.
With all that said, Michael, if you don't have high-quality dense metro fiber in select markets with minimal competition, good
demographics, good growth potential, you can't be successful in fiber in our view. And so as a result, we're really focused on the metro
element of our business. We're -- we like to say we're the local partner with national scale. And so in markets like Birmingham, we've got
boots on the ground. We know the various permitting authorities, we know the local -- we know all the local businesses, we know the
terrain, we know what it costs to build, we know where the opportunities are to expand our network and pick up low-hanging fruit.
And you don't get that unless you're very conscious about which metro markets you go into and you make investments, you stick to the
5% to 10% anchor yields and you've got a clear path to lease up. And if you pick the right markets, you've got a plethora of customer
opportunities, including enterprise, schools, traditional wholesale and then, of course, lit backhaul, dark fiber backhaul and small cells.
And that's really what we're seeing. When you've got the right network and the right market, you can have a great opportunity for both
anchor and lease-up and a healthy balance of both.
 
Michael Ian Rollins
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - MD & U.S. Telecoms Analyst
And just one quick follow-up. What's the algorithm these days for the minimal capital intensity in fiber as a percent of revenue to replace
churn and to keep that fiber revenue flat to organically growing over time?
 
Kenneth A. Gunderman
Uniti Group Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Yes. We haven't disclosed that number I think in some time. I don't know if we ever have actually. But our maintenance CapEx is around
3% and our capital intensity is from an aggregate basis. I really think -- and our churn is very low. I mean, we talk about it as
industry-leading, it's certainly right up there with a write-down there in terms of industry leading, so very low, 0.2%. So we'll have to
refresh on that number, Michael. But I really think it's kind of around -- probably around 10%, plus or minus a little bit, but right around
10%.
 
Operator
At this time I would like to turn the conference back to Kenny Gunderman for closing remarks.
 
Kenneth A. Gunderman
Uniti Group Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Look forward to updating you further on future calls -- Uniti Group and look forward to updating you further on future calls. Thank you
for joining today.
 
Operator
This concludes today's conference call. Thank you for participating. You may now disconnect.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
©2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.