CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
George John Carter
Franklin Street Properties Corp. - Chairman & CEO
 
Jeffrey B. Carter
Franklin Street Properties Corp. - President & CIO
 
John F. Donahue
Franklin Street Properties Corp. - EVP
 
John G. Demeritt
Franklin Street Properties Corp. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
 
Scott H. Carter
Franklin Street Properties Corp. - Executive VP, General Counsel & Secretary
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Good morning. Thank you for attending today's Franklin Street Properties Corp. Q3 2022 Earnings Call. My name is Megan, and I'll be
your moderator for today's call. (Operator Instructions)
I would now like to pass the conference over to our host, Scott Carter, General Counsel. Scott, please go ahead.
 
Scott H. Carter
Franklin Street Properties Corp. - Executive VP, General Counsel & Secretary
Good morning and welcome to the Franklin Street Properties Third Quarter 2022 Earnings Call. Joining me this morning are George
Carter, our Chief Executive Officer; John Demeritt, our Chief Financial Officer; Jeff Carter, our President and Chief Investment Officer;
John Donahue, President of FSP Property Management; and Toby Daley, Executive Vice President of FSP Property Management.
Please note that various remarks that we may make about future expectations, plans and prospects for the company may constitute
forward-looking statements for purposes of the safe harbor provisions under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Actual
results may differ materially from those indicated by these forward-looking statements as a result of various important factors, including
those discussed in the Risk Factors section of our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021, as amended by our
quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, which are on file with the SEC.
In addition, these forward-looking statements represent the company's expectations only as of today, November 2, 2022. While the
company may elect to update these forward-looking statements, it specifically disclaims any obligation to do so. Any forward-looking
statements should not be relied upon as representing the company's estimates or views as of any date subsequent to today.
At times during this call, we may refer to funds from operations, or FFO. Reconciliations of FFO and other non-GAAP financial measures
to GAAP net income are contained in yesterday's press release, which is available on the Investor Relations section of our website at
www.fspreit.com.
Now I'll turn the call over to John Demeritt. John?
 
John G. Demeritt
Franklin Street Properties Corp. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
Thank you, Scott, and good morning, everyone. I'm going to give a very brief overview of our third quarter results. And afterward, I'll pass
the call to George for his comments. As a reminder, our comments today will refer to our earnings release, which Scott just mentioned
can be found on our website and also bears our supplemental package and 10-Q.
We reported funds from operations, or FFO, of about $9 million or $0.09 per share for the third quarter of '22 and reported GAAP net
income of $17.2 million or $0.17 per share for the third quarter. On August 31, '22, we sold 2 office properties located in Broomfield,
Colorado for an aggregate sale price of $102.5 million and achieved a gain of $24.1 million on those sales.
On September 6, 2022, we prepaid the remaining balance of the $110 million term loan and have no debt maturities at this point until
January of '24. Primarily as a result of this debt reduction, our net debt to EBITDA decreased to 6.9x at September 30, '22, compared to
8.3x at the end of June '22.
As of September 30, '22, we had $430 million of debt outstanding, and our debt coverage ratio was 2.5x. These calculations are
disclosed in our supplemental filing, if you'd like to look at them. As of September 30, we had liquidity of about $181.2 million between
availability on our revolver and cash on hand. As a reminder, all of our debt remains unsecured.
With that, I'll turn the call over to George. George?
 
George John Carter
Franklin Street Properties Corp. - Chairman & CEO
Thank you, John. And again, welcome to Franklin Street Properties Third Quarter 2022 Earnings Call. As the fourth quarter of 2022
begins, we continue to believe that the current price of our common stock does not accurately reflect the value of our underlying real
estate assets. Our primary objectives for the balance of the year remain to increase shareholder value through the potential sale of select
properties where we believe that short- to intermediate-term valuation potential has been reached and to increase occupancy in our
continuing portfolio of real estate.
During the third quarter, we did sell 2 properties in Broomfield, Colorado, 380 and 390 Interlocken, for $102.5 million and as John said,
prepaid in full a $110 million term loan. Our funds from operations, or FFO, was approximately $9 million or $0.09 per share for the
quarter.
As 2022 has progressed, we are finding that both debt and equity capital available for potential purchasers of office properties and other
commercial real estate has been more and more negatively impacted. We believe that current economic conditions, office market
conditions, geopolitical events and other factors are contributing to the circumstance.
Volatility in the capital markets has created funding uncertainty among potential purchasers of office properties and has generally
resulted in longer periods of time to close dispositions. As a result, we are updating our property disposition guidance for full year 2022
to be in the range of approximately $102.5 million to $200 million in aggregate gross proceeds compared to our previously estimated
range of $200 million to $300 million.
While we are not providing disposition guidance for 2023 at this time, we believe that some of the disposition activity that we had
anticipated would occur in 2022 will now likely occur in the first quarter of 2023. We are currently working with identified potential
purchasers on new potential dispositions that will result in approximately $180 million in aggregate gross proceeds in addition to the
$102.5 million already closed. We will continue to update our disposition guidance quarterly in our earnings releases.
Now I will turn the call over to John Donahue, President of FSP Property Management Corp. John?
 
John F. Donahue
Franklin Street Properties Corp. - EVP
Thank you, George. Good morning, everyone. The FSP portfolio was approximately 75.9% leased at the end of the third quarter
compared to 76.3% leased at the end of the second quarter. The decrease was primarily attributable to asset dispositions and lease
maturities.
Economic occupancy was approximately 72.7% at the end of the third quarter compared to 72.0% occupied at the end of the second
quarter. The increase was largely due to new tenant lease commencements. FSP has finalized approximately 342,000 square feet of
total leasing year-to-date and approximately 67,000 square feet during the third quarter of 2022. For the first 9 months of the year, FSP
has finalized approximately 217,000 square feet of new tenant leases, which represents 63% of total leasing year-to-date.
Leasing activity and new tenant demand across the nation for office space cooled and trailed off during the second quarter, and that
slowdown continued throughout the third quarter. As the worries of an economic recession have mounted, many companies have shifted
to a defensive mode in regards to occupancy decisions. The large majority of demand for the past 6 months or so has been small to
midsize requirements and particularly in professional and business services.
FSP is currently tracking approximately 400,000 square feet of new prospective tenants, including approximately 200,000 square feet
of prospects that have identified FSP assets on their respective shortlists. In addition, FSP has roughly 300,000 square feet of large new
tenant prospects that have appeared to hit the pause button due to postponement or reevaluation of occupancy decisions and needs.
Lease expirations for the remainder of calendar 2022 total approximately 53,000 square feet, representing 0.8% of FSP's portfolio. In
addition, there are approximately 443,000 square feet or 6.9% of FSP's portfolio expiring in 2023. However, FSP has upcoming lease
commencements in the near future of approximately 187,000 square feet, representing 2.9% of FSP's portfolio, the majority of which are
expected to produce FFO in late 2022 or early 2023.
Thank you. I will now turn it over to Jeff Carter.
 
Jeffrey B. Carter
Franklin Street Properties Corp. - President & CIO
Thank you, John. Good morning, everyone. We hope that everyone remains safe and healthy. FSP continues working to unlock value for
our shareholders that we believe is not being accurately reflected in our current public share price. We continue our efforts to achieve
positive results primarily through the sale of select properties in the private marketplace that we judge to have met their near- to
intermediate-term potential and also through efforts to lease our vacant space and renew existing tenant customers.
To date, FSP has and will continue to utilize sales proceeds principally to reduce indebtedness. More specifically, since December of
2020 when our recent disposition efforts began, FSP has reduced corporate indebtedness by approximately $600 million or
approximately 58%.
In recent months, growing economic uncertainty and geopolitical risks have been making headlines, which when combined with rising
interest rates have added stress to the commercial office real estate landscape. Within this environment, FSP and our national brokerage
partners are generally still experiencing interest, albeit at a reduced level, in the acquisition of high-quality, well-located office
properties.
However, there has been a decline nationally in both the ability and amount of time it is taking for investors to procure both debt and
equity capital to facilitate potential purchases, which has elongated closing time frames. As mentioned, on the disposition front, FSP
announced on August 31 the sale of 380 and 390 Interlocken in Greater Denver for $102.5 million in total gross sales proceeds, which
resulted in a gain of approximately $24 million.
And while we are unable to disclose specific property sales metrics, when looking at all of our disposition efforts to unlock value that
began in December of 2020 and have totaled approximately $800 million in gross proceeds, we have achieved an aggregate weighted
average in-place cap rate of approximately 5.8% on both a cash and a GAAP basis.
FSP continues to source prospective buyers for our targeted dispositions, which currently includes our working with specific prospective
buyers on approximately $180 million in additional potential sales. Given current market conditions, however, we recognize that if
successful, some of these prospective dispositions may spill into the first quarter of 2023. With this in mind and as mentioned, FSP
updated our property disposition guidance for full year 2022 to be in the range of $102.5 million to $200 million in aggregate gross sales
proceeds.
And with that, we thank you for listening to our earnings conference call today. And now at this time, we'd like to open up the call for any
questions. Megan?
 
Operator
There are no questions waiting at this time. So I'll pass the conference back over to George Carter for closing remarks. I do apologize...
 
George John Carter
Franklin Street Properties Corp. - Chairman & CEO
Thank you, Megan. Thank you, everyone, for turning in to our call and look forward to speaking with you all next quarter.
 
Operator
That concludes the Franklin Street Properties Corp. Q3 2022 Earnings Call. Thank you for your participation. You may now disconnect
your line.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
©2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.