CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
Alan D. Gold
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - Executive Chairman
 
Ben Regin
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - Director of Investments & Finance
 
Brian J. Wolfe
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - VP, General Counsel & Company Secretary
 
Catherine Hastings
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - CFO & Treasurer
 
Paul E. Smithers
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
Alexander David Goldfarb
Piper Sandler & Co., Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
 
Eric Des Lauriers
Craig-Hallum Capital Group LLC, Research Division - Senior Research Analyst
 
Scott Thomas Fortune
ROTH Capital Partners, LLC, Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
 
William Thomas Catherwood
BTIG, LLC, Research Division - Director & REIT Analyst
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Good day, and welcome to the Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. Q3 2022 Earnings Conference Call. (Operator Instructions) Please
note, today's event is being recorded. I'd now like to turn the conference over to Brian Wolfe, General Counsel. Please go ahead, sir.
 
Brian J. Wolfe
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - VP, General Counsel & Company Secretary
Thank you for joining the call. Presenting today are Alan Gold, Executive Chairman; Paul Smithers, President and Chief Executive Officer;
Catherine Hastings, Chief Financial Officer; and Ben Regin, Vice President of Investments.
Before we begin, I'd like to remind everyone that statements made during today's conference call may be deemed forward-looking
statements within the meaning of the safe harbor of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and actual results may differ
materially due to a variety of risks, uncertainties and other factors. Please refer to the documents filed by the company with the SEC,
specifically the most recent reports on Forms 10-K and 10-Q, which identify important risk factors that could cause actual results to differ
from those contained in the forward-looking statements.
We are not obligated to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events
or otherwise. In addition, on today's call, we will discuss certain non-GAAP financial information such as FFO, normalized FFO and
adjusted FFO. You can find this information together with reconciliations to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure in our
earnings release issued yesterday as well as in our 8-K filed with the SEC. I'll now hand the call over to Alan. Alan?
 
Alan D. Gold
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - Executive Chairman
Thank you, Brian, and welcome, everyone. We are pleased to report another solid quarter of operations and financial results, especially in
the context of the challenging macroeconomic conditions across industries that we are all experiencing. We believe we have positioned
ourselves well in this context with one of the strongest and most experienced teams or real estate professionals in the cannabis industry
with a high-quality portfolio and are arguably one of the most conservative, flexible balance sheets across the real estate sector. Now to
recap the quarter, we generated total revenues of $71 million in Q3, with growth in excess of 30% over the prior year's third quarter. Rent
collection for IIPs operating portfolio was 97% for the 9 months ended September 30, 2022, with only tenants Kings Garden and vertical
not paying their full contractual rent. As we noted in our 8-K filed in September, we entered into a confidential conditional settlement
agreement with Kings Garden.
We are limited at this juncture as to what we can discuss. But we expect to provide further information in the coming months as we can.
For now, Kings Garden continues to occupy 4 of the properties under that agreement, while relinquishing 2 of the properties that are
under development back to us. We are pleased to report that we have an LOI, letter of intent for a long-term lease at one of the
properties in just over a month of marketing the property for lease and look forward to finalizing the arrangement with that operator.
With respect to the San Bernardino property under development. With the current California market environment, we are evaluating all
possible uses for that property, including non-cannabis uses. And earlier this week, we executed on our first property disposition, selling
a property in Pennsylvania that will be acquired in 2019 and leased to Maitri, a private single-state operator, -- we sold the property for
$23.5 million or about $461 per square foot, which was above our basis in the property, including all funded improvements.
We are pleased to execute on this transaction and with our pipeline of potential additional investments, we see an opportunity to recycle
that capital into superior risk-adjusted returns for our stockholders. We continue to see significant opportunities to place capital.
However, we continue to be highly selective and patient in our process with the tightening of financial conditions also having a significant
impact on our own cost of capital. That said, we are pleased with the progress we have made in placing capital over the course of the
year with just under $370 million of new acquisitions and additional investments in the 9 months ended September 30. Of course, we
continue to maintain one of the most conservative balance sheets in the commercial real estate industry with 12% debt to total assets, no
material maturities until 2026 and a debt service coverage ratio in excess of 15x.
As we have noted throughout our 6 years of reporting our results to you all, we continue to have a deep conviction in the long-term
growth prospects of the regulated cannabis industry and are positioned as the preeminent provider of real estate capital for operators
mission-critical real estate. I will now turn the call over to Paul to discuss industry dynamics. Paul?
 
Paul E. Smithers
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Thanks, Alan. I would first like to emphasize, as Alan noted, that our conviction of the long-term growth of the regulated cannabis
industry is unabated, with expectations from industry analysts that U.S. regulated cannabis sales will continue its annualized
double-digit growth over the coming years. As we noted on our last call, we have seen unit pricing for regulated cannabis products
declined in certain states at the wholesale level in the past months, reflective of what we believe to be a number of factors, including
basic supply-demand dynamics driven by licensing structures, lack of meaningful enforcement in certain states on illicit non-licensed
cannabis sales by state and local law enforcement authorities, taxation and general macroeconomic conditions. We have seen and do
expect to continue to see price compression on cannabis unit pricing across states to varying degrees depending on that state's market
dynamics and program specifics.
That said, we are closely monitoring the impact that California Attorney General, Rob Bonta's recent announcement may have on the
very large, relatively uninhibited illicit market in the state of California. In October, the California Attorney General announced that
California would expand its enforcement efforts against illicit cannabis grows with its eradication and prevention of illicit cannabis task
force shifting the seasonal 90-day focus on eradicating illicit grows to a year-round practice with one of its goals to support the legal
market.
As we noted before, we believe this continued price compression will require operators to continue to focus on the dual aspects of brand
strength through product quality and efficiency of operations and that our mission-critical facilities are well designed to achieve both
goals for our tenant partners. As we should note, of course, that while wholesale average price compression provides some informative
value, pricing is heavily dependent with wide ranges based on product quality and licensing structures with higher quality, vertically
integrated operators have distinct advantage over others in terms of pricing dynamics.
Capital availability. As we noted on our last call, financial markets have become increasingly volatile and restrictive over the past months
since the U.S. Federal Reserve began tightening monetary policy in March and pursuit of path of increasing interest rates on a time line
that we frankly have never witnessed a country. That volatility and restrictive environment has not dissipated in any way from what we
have seen. And we see the war in Ukraine, other geopolitical tensions and supply chain issues, adding to the uncertain economic outlook
and continuing to stoke inflationary expectations.
As with other industries, the cost of capital and capital availability has fundamentally changed for cannabis operators over the course of
this year. As we noted previously, capital raising across the cannabis industry continues to be very subdued versus the relative strength of
2021, and debt continues to be the focus for most cannabis operators this year, with minimal equity raised. In fact, according to Viridian
Capital Advisors, total capital raised for U.S. regulated cannabis operators was down by more than 2/3 during the first 3 quarters of
2022 versus 2021.
And in terms of equity capital raised down 96% from the prior year period. I'd also note that capital raising has noticeably diminished in
the public REIT markets as well during Q3, with total capital raising in terms of both debt and equity being the lowest since Q4 of 2009,
the depth of the -- great Recession. Total capital raising for Q3 was $6.2 billion compared to $29.4 billion raised in the third quarter of
last year.
Inflation and supply chain issues. As we noted in our prior call, inflation continues to impact our operators in terms of labor and input
costs in addition to driving up the cost of construction for development and redevelopment activities versus original budgets. In addition,
continued supply chain issues and labor shortages are resulting in certain projects being delayed in their completion. Of course, these
developments have the effect of requiring the operator to put up more capital to complete the project and/or resulting in delays in
revenue generation as projects take longer to complete. In combination with the current environment of limited capital availability, these
can be significant obstacles for certain operators.
Federal legislation - In terms of recent federal developments, while there is no substantive movement to report as it pertains to federal
legislation, we do want to touch on President Biden's announcement to pardon prior federal offenses for simple cannabis possession and
the directive to the HHS Secretary and Attorney General to initiate a review of how cannabis is scheduled under federal law. While this
was certainly an attention-grabbing announcement, the pardon for federal Defenses itself impacts a very small cohort we have a few
thousand as a vast majority of convictions for simple cannabis position are made at the state level.
However, pardons constitute an action that cannot be undone by subsequent administrations. And so in a sense, this is the first
permanent change to the federal cannabis landscape in a very long time, and there have been some who postulate this action as a
potential factor contributing to the argument for notification of federal laws pertaining to cannabis with the basis being that the federal
government has not strictly enforced cannabis laws for years, and therefore, it should be left to the stage to decide. We find this an
interesting viewpoint.
And ultimately, it is unclear what, if any, impact this announcement will have on the various federal legislative efforts in process. In terms
of President Biden's directive to the HHS Secretary and AG to initiate a review of current cannabis scheduling, while this does represent a
potential road to rescheduling or descheduling -- we think it is a road that will take years to travel, requiring significant clinical research
and, of course, time-consuming litigation along the way. I'd like to now turn the call over to Ben to discuss our portfolio and investment
activity in the third quarter and year-to-date. Ben?
 
Ben Regin
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - Director of Investments & Finance
Thanks, Paul. For this call, I'd like to cover certain characteristics of our property portfolio and tenant roster in addition to discussing our
investments year-to-date. As you know, we own 111 properties across 19 states, comprising 8.7 million rentable square feet. Beginning
this quarter, we have bifurcated our portfolio between our operating portfolio, consisting of 109 properties and construction in progress
or CIP, comprising the 2 development projects previously leased to Kings Garden and the expansion project at one property where Kings
Garden continues to occupy the property pursuant to our settlement agreement with them.
For the 9 months ended September 30, 2022, we collected approximately 97% of contractually due base rent and property management
fees from our operating portfolio. The Kings Garden defaults in July contributed to a large majority of that 3% of uncollected rent. And as
we've noted in prior calls, vertical, a tenant of ours in Southern California that represents less than 1% of our total invested capital and
contractual rents has been making partial payments over time. As Alan noted, pursuant to the settlement agreement with Kings Garden,
we regained possession of 2 properties that were under development. We signed an LOI for a lease at one of the properties in a little over
a month of marketing and look forward to working with that prospective tenant towards finalizing the lease.
For our San Bernardino property, given the size and location of the asset, we are exploring all possible uses, including noncannabis to
maximize value of the asset in the current California market environment. Our operating portfolio's total cost basis, including
commitments to fund future improvements, equates to approximately $272 per square foot, which we believe is substantially below
replacement costs. Our operating portfolio is split between 67 cultivation in ore processing facilities, representing 90% of our invested
capital, 33 retail locations, representing 3% of our invested capital and 9 facilities conducting combined cultivation and processing and
retail activities, representing 7% of our invested capital. No one state accounts for more than 17% of our total invested capital and no one
of our 30 tenants accounts for more than 14% of our total invested capital.
Across our operating portfolio, properties with multistate operators as tenants make up 85% of our invested or committed capital and
properties with public company tenants makes up 55% of our investor committee capital. Of our 109 properties in our operating
portfolio, 15 were under either partial or full development or redevelopment or approximately 14% of our operating portfolio as of
September 30, constituting approximately 1.6 million rentable square feet with a weighted average lease length of 15.5 years for the
operating portfolio. We continue to believe in the tremendous value for our mission-critical real estate portfolio as well as our operators
and their ability to weather the current conditions and we'll continue to monitor their progress closely in coming months. In terms of
investment activity, in the first 3 quarters of this year, we acquired 9 properties and executed lease amendments to provide funding for
improvements at 9 properties, representing a total investment commitment of about $369 million.
In addition, as Alan noted, we executed on our first property disposition earlier this week, selling a Pennsylvania property that we
originally acquired in 2019 and leased to Maitri, a private single-state operator for $23.5 million or approximately $461 per square foot,
which is, of course, the price per square foot, well above our operating portfolio average of $272 per square foot and above what we
originally paid for the property, including funded improvements. While we are firm believers in the Pennsylvania market, in our view, this
transaction presented an attractive opportunity to strategically recycle capital into other opportunities with superior risk-adjusted
returns.
While we are, of course, focused on long-term ownership of our properties, we will continue to evaluate our portfolio and make strategic
decisions based on the evolution of the individual state markets and opportunities that present themselves. In terms of expected
additional investment activity, as always, forecasting investment activity in this industry is challenging. And as we noted on our last call,
we continue to expect the pace of capital deployment to be significantly lighter than prior quarters as we focus on the ability to raise
capital on terms that we determine to be reasonably favorable in light of the opportunities to place that capital. With that, I'll turn it over
to Catherine. Catherine?
 
Catherine Hastings
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - CFO & Treasurer
We generated total revenues of $71 million for the quarter, a 32% increase from Q3 of last year. The increase was driven primarily by the
acquisition and leasing of new properties, additional building infrastructure allowances provided to tenants at certain properties that
resulted in base rent adjustments and contractual rent escalations at certain properties. During the quarter, we did not collect
contractual rents totaling $5.7 million from Kings Garden and vertical, which includes approximately $5.3 million in base rents and
property management fees and $369,000 in tenant reimbursements for property taxes and insurance. However, we did apply
approximately $2.6 million from security deposits held by us for defaults by Kings Garden in its obligations to pay rent to partially offset
this decrease.
As we've indicated in the past, our Q3 revenue reflects only partial quarters of revenues from the acquisitions and investments executed
during the quarter. And our revenues for the quarter were also impacted by scheduled rent phase-ins under certain leases, which will
continue to phase in over the next 6 to 9 months as we continue to account for all of our leases on a cash basis. For the 3 months ended
September 30, 2022, we recorded net income attributable to common stockholders of $37 million or $1.32 per diluted share. Net income
for the quarter was impacted by $2 million in litigation-related expenses incurred related to Kings Garden and the shareholder lawsuit
filed earlier this year. You'll note that for this quarter, we've added back this expense from our calculation of FFO to normalized FFO.
Adjusted funds from operations for the quarter, which adds back noncash stock-based compensation and noncash interest expense
related to our unsecured senior notes to normalized FFO was $60 million or $2.13 per diluted share.
On October 14, we paid our quarterly dividend of $1.80 per share to common stockholders of record as of September 30, equivalent to an
annualized dividend of $7.20 per common share. As we noted in our prior press releases, our Board of Directors generally evaluate
adjustments to the level of our quarterly common stock dividend every 6 months with any adjustments expected to be declared in Q1 and
Q3 of each year. The Board continues to target a dividend payout ratio of 75% to 85% on AFFO on a stabilized portfolio basis. For Q3, our
payout ratio for the quarter was 84.5%. We also continue to issue draws for improvement allowances or construction development to our
operators under our leases. As we previously noted and discussed extensively on this call, these improvements are critical for the efficient
production of quality cannabis products at scale. In Q3 of 2022, we funded approximately $35 million in draws submitted for
improvements in construction activity at our properties.
As Paul mentioned, inflation is impacting labor and input costs for operators in addition to driving up cost of construction for
development and redevelopment activities. We are also seeing construction delays with certain development and redevelopment
projects in our portfolio, similar to other construction projects generally with longer lead times for materials, given the ongoing supply
disruptions, which the broader economy continues to face, which we believe may have been further amplified in recent months by the
war in Ukraine, enrolling economic lockdowns in certain countries in response to continued COVID outbreaks. As just one example of
these delays, we've seen electrical switch gear for properties under development or redevelopment, take up to a year plus for delivery to
the property after an order is placed.
At quarter end, we had approximately $2.6 billion in total gross assets and a total of about $306 million in debt, consisting solely of
unsecured debt with no maturities this year or next year and $300 million of that debt not maturing until 2026. Our debt to total gross
assets ratio was 12% at quarter end, and our total fixed cash interest obligation on an annual basis was $16.7 million or a little over $4
million per quarter. We've maintained investment-grade credit rating and have a debt service coverage ratio in excess of 15x. Finally,
we'd like to note that our thoughts are with those impacted by Hurricane Ian. We've kept in close contact with our tenant operators in
Florida, leading up to landfall of the hurricane and through the aftermath and our properties sustained minimal damage. And with that,
I'll turn it back to Alan. Alan?
 
Alan D. Gold
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - Executive Chairman
Thanks, Catherine. I'd like to note the following is closing. Our conviction is as strong as ever in the long-term growth and promise of the
regulated cannabis industry. And our team's commitment to serving you all as owners of the company every day to effectively manage
the company through the inevitable flows of the regulated cannabis industry. We certainly appreciate and value all of our long-term
owners and our team is singularly focused on the protection and enhancement of the value of this company for your benefit. With that, I'd
like to open it up to questions.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Operator
Thank you. We will now begin the Question-and-Answer Session. (Operator Instructions). At this time, we will pause momentarily to
symbol a roster. Our first question comes from Tom Catherwood from BTIG.
 
William Thomas Catherwood
BTIG, LLC, Research Division - Director & REIT Analyst
Maybe starting with the Maitri asset sale. Very interesting to see that this quarter. Can you provide some more color around the
transaction? Kind of what I'm getting at is, was this a reverse inquiry? Was this something that you were evaluating your portfolio and
kind of decided to kind of prune some of your assets? What was the driver behind this transaction?
 
Alan D. Gold
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - Executive Chairman
All right. Thank you, Tom. It's a very interesting question or a good question. Keeping in mind that 85% of our tenants are MSOs and only
15% are single-state operators and Maitri being one of those single state operators. So we are in constant contact with all of our tenants,
but primarily highly focused given the dynamics of the industry and our single state operators. And an opportunity came about between
Maitri investors and owners, where it was a beneficial win-win situation for them and for us to be able to transact. And we took it upon
ourselves to move forward with the transaction, which I do think is a win-win structure in that they've reduced the need for the long-term
lease or they eliminate their long-term lease. And we get the capital back to redeploy in even higher yielding, better quality operators.
 
William Thomas Catherwood
BTIG, LLC, Research Division - Director & REIT Analyst
Got it. Appreciate that, Alan. That's really helpful. And then maybe given the economic uncertainty, obviously, you mentioned in your
prepared remarks, but are you seeing cannabis operators pause or delay their capital spending plans?
 
Alan D. Gold
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - Executive Chairman
I think all industries and all companies are using this time or taking this time to reevaluate all of their operations. And I don't think the
cannabis industry is different in that sense. The one positive thing about the cannabis industry is that revenues are continuing to -- are
expected to continue to grow. That's new states are coming online the revenue is expected to double by, I don't know, 2026. And in new
states, there are -- I think there's 4 new states that are looking to approve adult use. And there are 5 states that are expected -- that are
on the ballot coming this coming up week. And with that growth and demand, I think the industry itself is while still nascent, still has
tremendous growth opportunities.
 
William Thomas Catherwood
BTIG, LLC, Research Division - Director & REIT Analyst
Understood. And that makes sense, especially with the expansion of state programs. I think, Paul, you had mentioned that as operators,
cannabis operators are looking to fund these expansions that they've been turning invariably to debt recently. We've seen those yields
push up 300-plus basis points. That was before the rate hike yesterday. Has there been a similar move in yields on sale leaseback
transactions or deals that people are looking for in the market?
 
Paul E. Smithers
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Yes. I think, Tom, I think generally, we have seen an uptick commensurate with the rest of the environment. As we mentioned that the
pipeline still remains very strong, even at these increased yields. I don't know, Ben, do you want to give any more specific color on that?
 
Ben Regin
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - Director of Investments & Finance
Sure. I mean, as Paul said, we are seeing a similar uptick in yields for our capital. We're seeing a tremendous demand for the capital. And
back to your earlier question as part of why we were so excited to execute on the Maitri transaction to recycle that capital into extremely
attractive, very high-quality opportunities.
 
William Thomas Catherwood
BTIG, LLC, Research Division - Director & REIT Analyst
Appreciate that color. And then last one for me. Along those same lines of thinking of available capital to put to work. On the 2 larger
Kings Garden developments, it looks like your basis in the assets is $10 million lower than last quarter and the capital committed to the
projects is down almost $28 million. Are these amounts now part of your uncommitted capital availability? Or are those kind of amounts
still earmarked to those developments?
 
Alan D. Gold
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - Executive Chairman
I think that, one cash is kind of - it goes on anywhere. It's cash that's come in and we can use it in any way we have the -- or any way we
want to. The -- I want to be very careful that we don't talk about the settlement in at this point. We still -- there's still things that we're
working through, and we'll look to talk about that in the months ahead. But we're excited about the -- our availability of uncommitted
capital. And the -- certainly, the opportunities we have, as Ben said, in our very strong pipeline with very strong operators.
 
William Thomas Catherwood
BTIG, LLC, Research Division - Director & REIT Analyst
Got it. Really appreciate the color. Thank you, everyone.
 
Operator
The next question comes from Alexander Goldfarb with Piper Sandler.
 
Alexander David Goldfarb
Piper Sandler & Co., Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
Just a few questions. First, maybe continuing on that line of questions. Can you just give a sense of the economics of the backfill on the
one warehouse and your thoughts around the other just -- it's great to see trades. Obviously, the Pittsburgh one is great, but just would
be useful certainly to get a sense of the ability to reuse and whether or not the sites are worth more or less.
 
Alan D. Gold
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - Executive Chairman
Okay. Well, first, on our -- the Pittsburgh transaction, certainly, we sold that at a higher -- or a higher price than we originally paid for. So
there's one very strong data point. Also, the -- what we sold it for on a per square foot basis is certainly higher than we have in many of
our other assets in that market and across the country. Third, on the asset -- the development asset that we have that we have from
Kings Garden, we are very, very pleased with the economics associated with the LOI. This letter of intent is just a letter of intent, and
we're moving as quickly as we can to finalize lease. I just want to make sure that people understand that nothing is done until we actually
have a definitive agreement. But we're very, very pleased with the economics associated with that transaction.
 
Alexander David Goldfarb
Piper Sandler & Co., Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
What about the remaining one that you're going to reevaluate for alternative uses? How does your basis compare to what alternative
uses would be?
 
Alan D. Gold
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - Executive Chairman
Well, we think the basis and it is below what other industrial commercial buildings in the market have traded for in the past. So that's
one good thing. The fact that it's on the 215 free weight the fact that it's a freeway adjacent, it has freeway visibility, all play to the quality
of this asset. We are in the preliminary stages of trying to maximize that value for our shareholders. And we hope to have more
information to come in the next 12 to 18 months.
 
Alexander David Goldfarb
Piper Sandler & Co., Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
Okay. Next question is, Pat, on the security deposits and just thinking about fourth quarter and go forward, is there any security deposits
left remaining? Or should we think about fourth quarter being down, sort of, call it, whatever, roughly $3 million.
 
Paul E. Smithers
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Can you clarify left? And what are you referring to?
 
Alexander David Goldfarb
Piper Sandler & Co., Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
You used security deposits, -- sorry about that. Land line, we still have. Security -- you guys have security deposits that you applied
against the Kings Garden rent. I'm assuming that you've exhausted those security deposits. So for the fourth quarter, it sounds like rents
-- the quarterly FFO was going to be down by the amount of those security deposits that were applied in the third quarter. Is that the
case?
 
Catherine Hastings
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - CFO & Treasurer
Yes. We have applied our full security deposit. But beyond that, we're not able to comment due to the conditional settlement.
 
Alexander David Goldfarb
Piper Sandler & Co., Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
Okay. And then just 2 other questions. One is going back to the comments that you guys talked about out in California, -- good to see the
AG out there going after the legal market. But just curious, you got Michigan, Colorado, Oregon, Washington, California, all these
markets that have either had tremendous price competition or unlimited licenses or et cetera, your exposure in those markets, one, are
all the tenants current? And 2, are these all markets that you would continue to expand in? Or is your view that as you grow the company,
you're going to reduce exposure to the unlimited license markets.
 
Alan D. Gold
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - Executive Chairman
So as reported, we've collected the rent we collect the rents. And in those markets, all of our tenants are current as of today. But what I
want to -- you focused on the geographic location of these tenants. And I think that we want you to want to make sure that you
understand is that when we're making these investments, yes, we're making them in geographic locations, which we think are
high-quality locations and mission-critical facilities, but they're mission-critical facilities for the tenant operators. And why we're so
focused on the fact that 85% of our tenants are multistate operators, benefiting from a broader market than any one specific market. We
believe that, that has helped us generate one of the highest quality portfolios of tenants.
As a matter of fact, as you can see on Page 14 of our financial supplement, public tenants within our top 15 tenants have a combined
market cap of over $9.7 billion as of the end of the third quarter. And the public tenants within our top 15 tenants reported at the end of
the second quarter, I think revenue of over $1.4 billion and an annual run rate of over $5.9 billion. And lastly, of our top 15 tenants, all of
the public tenants reported positive adjusted EBITDA in the second quarter. So what we're saying is that we have very strong tenants and
why we focus on the MSOs because of any individual market might have a up or down in any period of time.
 
Alexander David Goldfarb
Piper Sandler & Co., Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
Okay. And then just a final question. Sentinel has been in the -- obviously, is a big issue you've been in the news. Is it -- are you seeing
anything that whereby the licensed dispensaries are benefiting. So your tenants are seeing bigger demand because people trust the
quality of the product they're getting there versus buying on the street. I'm just curious if there's been any sort of uptick because your
tenants obviously have extreme quality controls, where people who buy products on the street don't know what's getting mixed in there.
Have you seen any change in that or not really?
 
Alan D. Gold
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - Executive Chairman
Well, I think that's an interesting data point and an interesting situation that is out there. Yes, our tenants do go through a tremendous
amount of scrutiny and regulations to produce their product and making sure that not only the product is pesticide-free and has an
environmental -- doesn't have any environmental factors associated with the products. So in that sense, we think that are -- that there is
a lot of confidence in the product that our tenants provide. To specifically say that any one factor is increased revenues. I don't think we
can say that, but what we can say is that revenues are expected to double by 2026.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from Scott Fortune with ROTH Capital.
 
Scott Thomas Fortune
ROTH Capital Partners, LLC, Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
I just want to follow up on some comments about the pipeline. We've seen the cost of capital for the cannabis industry increase here.
Many of the top MSOs are cutting around their CapEx plans here. Cost of capital, we saw 2 deals around 12%, 13% from that side debt
rate. But overall, the demand -- is this causing more incoming calls for your pipeline for sales leaseback for these well capitalized in the
so -- just kind of quantify our overall interest in demand for potential sales leaseback opportunities in your pipeline versus kind of last
year or a couple of quarters ago?
 
Alan D. Gold
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - Executive Chairman
Yes. No, I mean -- and I'll have Ben follow up on this. But yes, the -- our pipeline is very strong. It continues to be strong, and it's strong
for a number of factors. One, when we commit to a transaction, our tenant partners know that we execute on that. And so we have a
great reputation. And that reputation stems from, I think, just a very strong management team that has been in this industry for a very
long period of time. And actually, we, I think, have the longest tenure in the cannabis real estate industry. But -- and I think the continued
demand for our capital is there and at very attractive rates. Ben, do you want to follow up on...
 
Ben Regin
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - Director of Investments & Finance
Yes, sure, Scott. I mean, we are continuing to see tremendous demand for our capital. I think a lot of the top operators in the industry
recognize the value that we bring through our reputation, the value of being able to source nondilutive capital in a very challenging
environment. And we're very excited about our ability to capitalize on that given, as Alan mentioned, the management team we have in
place an extremely strong and flexible balance sheet that we have and just a tremendous amount of opportunities in the industry.
 
Scott Thomas Fortune
ROTH Capital Partners, LLC, Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
Okay. I appreciate the color. And then just kind of a follow-up on the health of the tenant base here in this type of capital market. You
mentioned kind of single-state operators or the smaller tenants that are maybe under a little more pressure to meet debt obligations,
obviously, we bring debt here and potential defaults there, do you work with the lenders with the companies of the challenged
companies potentially? And what is the process of an operator defaulting on debt outside of your guys side and lenders kind of go down
the process of forced liquidation. Is there a recourse for IIP there? Kind of step us through on those type of small tenants that you might
have to work with?
 
Alan D. Gold
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - Executive Chairman
I think -- no, I mean there is not there. We don't -- if somebody defaults on the loan isn't necessarily a default on our lease as long as they
continue to pay our rent. Now the -- I think many of the debt lenders are really quasi partners with these tenants. And they certainly look
to the overall structure of any one of these tenants to help them succeed and continue to pay back not only their debt obligations but
continue the operations just in general. And so I think that that's how the -- how their relationships and their partnerships work and that
works to our benefit.
 
Scott Thomas Fortune
ROTH Capital Partners, LLC, Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
Got it. That you -- and then last real quick question for me, probably for Paul. Can you provide a little bit of color? I need some nice steps
by the bit administration, right? There's federal efforts around potential States coming on board here that free up potentially institutional
capital and the capital markets to help your tenant base. But more specifically of IIP, with your New York Stock Exchange listing, are you
seeing more discussions with the exchanges with potential uplisting with the tenants in your portfolio? And kind of in light of the
Campygrowth statement with the U.S.A. structure there. Can you provide maybe a little bit more color on what the exchanges need to
get to besides explicit safe harbor language to move forward with uplifting? -- does save with a new coal memo provide enough cover for
that or comfort that for thing. Just kind of a little more color on your thoughts around the patio listing for -- to help out your tenant base
there?
 
Paul E. Smithers
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Sure. So yes, I think the short answer, Scott, is the exchanges have said that unless there's -- until there's some significant movement at
the federal level, descheduling or rescheduling, they're not going to open up the exchanges. So the question then is what Canopy is
doing with the Toronto Exchange, that's interesting. -- but we did note that NASDAQ did object to the Canopy USA up listed them. That's
the latest as of this week. That's a fluid operation. But it is interesting to see if there's going to be any flight to the Toronto Exchange. As
far as SAFE, I think, obviously, Senator Schumer said Sunday, that they were very close to passing Safe. But I don't know if Senator
Schumer has a tremendous amount of credibility when he's talking about what Canada's bills are going to pass or not pass. But along
with the bans announcement to reexamine the scheduling and some movement on SAFE. We think Safe or Safe Plus does have a better
chance in the lame duck.
But as far as any safe harbor language for the exchanges, -- we don't think that's going to be part of Safe or Safe Plus right now because
if we dig down deep and look at the path to getting Safe Plus with some type of protection for the exchanges. It's got to go through
Sherrod Brown's Committee, and he has said he does not want to put in any language that would favor banking. I mean, unless there's
significant social equity language. So we're back to that same old battle we've had for the last 2 years, the social equity versus the capital
market access. So I think smart money, Scott says that if something is done in lame-duck it's going to be a very simple, safe without
capital market access.
 
Scott Thomas Fortune
ROTH Capital Partners, LLC, Research Division - MD & Senior Research Analyst
I appreciate your thoughts on that.
 
Operator
The next question comes from Eric Des Lauriers with Craig-Hallum Capital.
 
Eric Des Lauriers
Craig-Hallum Capital Group LLC, Research Division - Senior Research Analyst
First one is a follow-up on the Pennsylvania disposition. Just wondering how you're thinking about other potential properties that might
be available for sale. You guys obviously sort of called out how they are one of the single-state operators in your portfolio that represents
just 15% of the overall capital. Should we think of potential properties for sale as only those belonging to single-state operators? Just any
additional color on sort of what you consider as potentially available for sale for your properties?
 
Alan D. Gold
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - Executive Chairman
Yes. I mean I think we don't -- I mean, we're not looking at trying to sell anything that we've recently just required unless there's a
strategic reason behind it. I think that you could -- we have our San Bernardino asset that is held -- that we have on held in development,
and we could be looking at developing that or we could be looking at selling that asset. But in general, I think we're very pleased with the
quality of our assets and our tenants to date. And we'll look at 1 or 2 assets strategically for sale if it makes sense.
Does that answer your question? Do you have more questions?
 
Eric Des Lauriers
Craig-Hallum Capital Group LLC, Research Division - Senior Research Analyst
Yes, that does. I was on mute. You previously described your -- sort of the decreased acquisition activity despite your strong pipeline as
essentially a widening of the bid and ask spreads. I guess first question, are you noticing that spread narrowing at all? As these markets
sort of readjust to higher rates? Are you seeing a bit more of an agreeance on potential cap rates for these properties? And then second
question, would you characterize the negotiations with your potential investors in the same way as sort of strong demand but a
widespread here?
 
Alan D. Gold
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - Executive Chairman
Well, I mean, I think the best way to answer that is that we've gone from an acquisition program of consistent quarter-over-quarter
acquisitions to a very opportunistic model, where we're being very judicious in deploying the capital that we do have available to us to the
best operators that we can and being very careful as to our thoughts on future capital even though that we do have access to capital from
-- that our investors are, I think, positively looking at the way we're deploying the capital and being a steward of that capital. but that the
general market requires us to, I think, as I said, become -- be more opportunistic.
 
Eric Des Lauriers
Craig-Hallum Capital Group LLC, Research Division - Senior Research Analyst
Okay. That certainly makes sense. So I suppose in terms of us thinking about 2023, 2024, et cetera, not that you're giving guidance or
anything like that. But I guess the proper way to be thinking about this is more of a probably this continued opportunistic acquisition
pace as opposed to, okay, we have maybe a 2, 3, 4-quarter kind of low, but then we get cash up and gone and sort of continue our normal
acquisition pace. It should be more of the former than the latter, if I'm understanding correctly.
 
Alan D. Gold
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - Executive Chairman
Right, unless your crystal ball is much clearer than mine and that you could actually tell me what's going to happen in 2023 in the first
quarter. Because if you can, we should take that offline and have a really good conversation. But we just believe that there's a lot of
uncertainty in the market and we think that it's going to take some time for that uncertainty to become more clear. And then once that
happens, we can certainly discuss our acquisition pace at that point.
 
Operator
This concludes our question-and-answer session. I would like to turn the conference back over to Alan Gold for any closing remarks.
 
Alan D. Gold
Innovative Industrial Properties, Inc. - Executive Chairman
Thank you. And I would certainly want to thank all our stockholders for your support and your continued support. All the people who
have asked questions on the call. Thank you, very good questions. And most importantly, I want to thank the team for all their continued
hard and dedicated work during these interesting times that we're in. And so with that, thank you all, and we sign off.
 
Operator
The conference has now concluded. Thank you for attending today's presentation. You may now disconnect.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
©2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.