CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
Alison G. Griffin
Dynex Capital, Inc. - VP of IR
 
Byron L. Boston
Dynex Capital, Inc. - CEO, Co-CIO & Director
 
Robert S. Colligan
Dynex Capital, Inc. - Executive VP, CFO & Secretary
 
Smriti Laxman Popenoe
Dynex Capital, Inc. - President & Co-CIO
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
Bose Thomas George
Keefe, Bruyette, & Woods, Inc., Research Division - MD
 
Christopher Whitbread Patrick Nolan
Ladenburg Thalmann & Co. Inc., Research Division - EVP of Equity Research
 
Douglas Michael Harter
Crédit Suisse AG, Research Division - Director
 
Eric J. Hagen
BTIG, LLC, Research Division - Research Analyst
 
Jason Michael Stewart
JonesTrading Institutional Services, LLC, Research Division - Senior VP & Financial Services Analyst
 
Trevor John Cranston
JMP Securities LLC, Research Division - MD & Equity Research Analyst
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Good morning. My name is Dennis, and I will be your conference operator today. At this time, I would like to welcome everyone to the
Dynex Capital Third Quarter 2022 Earnings Conference Call. (Operator Instructions) I would now like to turn the conference over to
Alison Griffin, Vice President of Investor Relations. Please go ahead.
 
Alison G. Griffin
Dynex Capital, Inc. - VP of IR
Thank you, Dan. Good morning, and thank you all for joining us today for the Dynex Capital's Third Quarter 2022 Earnings Call. The press
release associated with today's call was issued and filed with the SEC this morning, October 24. You may view the press release on the
homepage of the Dynex website at dynexcapital.com as well as on the SEC's website at sec.gov. Before we begin, we wish to remind you
that this conference call may contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of
1995. The words believe, expect, forecast, anticipate, estimate, project, plan, and similar expressions identify forward-looking statements
that are inherently subject to risks and uncertainties, some of which cannot be predicted or quantified. 
The company's actual results and timing of certain events could differ considerably from those projected in or contemplated by those
forward-looking statements as a result of unforeseen external factors or risks. For additional information on these factors or risks, please
refer to our disclosures filed with the SEC, which may be found on the Dynex website under Investor Center as well as on the SEC's
website. This conference call is being broadcast live over the internet with a streaming slide presentation, which can be found through a
webcast link on the homepage of our website. The slide presentation may also be referenced under quarterly reports on the Investor
Center page. 
Joining me on the call is Byron Boston, Chief Executive Officer and Co-Chief Investment Officer; Smriti Popenoe, President and Co-Chief
Investment Officer; and Robert Colligan, Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer. And with that, it is my pleasure to turn the call
over to Byron.
 
Byron L. Boston
Dynex Capital, Inc. - CEO, Co-CIO & Director
Thank you, Alison, and good morning. And let me start the call off with a few messages, a few thoughts for our shareholders and then
Rob and Smriti will take over with the more specifics. So to our shareholders, as I mentioned in the past, this is an incredible moment in
history across all major asset classes. Prices have fallen and volatility have materially increased, especially during the last 2 to 3 weeks of
the quarter. And even though all asset managers are in the same storm, I want you to know we're not all in the same boat. The Dynex
Capital boat was built to withstand a storm. We have been preparing for this type of environment for years. We have managed through
markets like this before, and it is our experience and flexibility that will guide us through to the other side of this complex market cycle. 
Given these challenges and complexity, I want to maintain our tradition of transparency and open dialogue by simplifying my takeaways
on the quarter to 5 key points: First, our portfolio is solid. Dynex is prepared for this market. Several years ago, we proactively moved up
in credit and up in liquidity, and we further increased our focus on liquidity after March 2020. Our portfolio is government-guaranteed
and is backed by U.S. borrowers and U.S. real estate. Agency mortgage-backed securities are second in liquidity only to U.S. treasuries,
and mortgage-backed securities have a history of being a very liquid and very efficient corner of the fixed-income markets, even in
turbulent markets like the one we are in now. Second, our liquidity position is strong. Most of our liquidity is in cash, the most liquid asset
evolved, but we also have unplanned agency securities that are easily financed or sold. 
As the markets took a decisive move toward chaotic volatility, we have been able to manage our balance sheet with confidence. We also
have enough capital to be opportunistic when the markets come, and we take advantage of this great return environment. Third, our
strategy was built for this. The core tenant of Dynex's investment strategy is preparation and flexibility. And over the past several years,
we have said repeatedly that we believe surprises are highly probable. We began talking with our investors about the increasing
complexity of global markets as far back as 2014. 
We understand through our experience that the global risk environment, by its nature, is too complex to allow us to predict what will
happen. But that doesn't mean we can't prepare, which is what we've done. Fourth, our management team has experience and
discipline. And in this volatile market environment, more than ever, you need an experienced and trustworthy team at the helm. We have
proven the value of experience in the past as we've reacted to other market events in a very thoughtful manner, as shown in our
long-term results.
We manage our business for the long term. And just as we've done in the past, we're determined to guide you, our shareholders, through
this disruptive market environment. And as always, we're committed to providing transparency and insights into our strategy as we guide
the Dynex ship through this storm to the unimaginable sunshine that will come out tomorrow. With that, I'm going to turn the call over to
Rob and Smriti and let them give you more details.
 
Robert S. Colligan
Dynex Capital, Inc. - Executive VP, CFO & Secretary
Thank you, Byron, and good morning all. The company reported a comprehensive loss of $2.20 per common share and a negative total
economic return of 12.9%. The negative total economic return was driven by declines in the value of our mortgage-backed securities and
TBA positions exceeding the increasing value of our interest rate hedges as spreads widened significantly this quarter, especially in the
month of September. Spreads are near historically wide levels, driven by recent economic policy and geopolitical risks. We believe our
portfolio will recover a significant amount of value when the flows into mortgage-backed securities improve or simply as pay-downs
occur over time. Smriti will cover market activity, including spreads, in her comments. 
Earnings available for distribution, or EAD, was $0.24 this quarter. G&A expenses and EAD include a one-time cost of $2.7 million or
$0.06 of severance costs related to the CFO transition during the third quarter. At Dynex, our key strategies include the management of
interest rate risk, liquidity management and protecting shareholder value. We accomplished this through thoughtful asset selection and
hedging activities. This quarter, we're highlighting the benefit of our hedging activities as our earnings available for distribution
calculation does not incorporate the positive impact of the company's interest rate risk mitigation strategies because our primary
hedging instrument is interest rate features. If the company used interest rate swaps instead of futures, the hedge benefit of the swap
would be included in both the net interest spread and earnings available for distribution. 
Through September 30, Dynex has over $500 million of hedge gains, primarily on futures interments. These realized hedge gains are
recognized immediately for GAAP reporting but are deferred for tax and are amortized into REIT taxable income over the hedge period of
approximately 10 years. The benefit of interest rate hedge gain amortization was approximately $9 million or $0.21 for the third quarter
and is estimated to be $12 million or $0.25 per common share for the next 5 quarters. The total amount of gain to amortize into REIT
taxable income can go up or down depending on the company's hedge position and movements in rates in subsequent quarters.
Since hedge gains are a component of REIT-taxable income, they will be part of the company's distribution requirements, along with
other ordinary gains and losses. As we move into the fourth quarter, we expect hedge gains will be supportive of the dividend in 2023
and beyond, even if net interest income and earnings available for distribution decline due to rising financing costs. Please see the
additional disclosures in our release and be on the lookout for our 10-Q, which will have additional information and will be filed next
week. I'll now turn the call over to Smriti for her comments on the quarter.
 
Smriti Laxman Popenoe
Dynex Capital, Inc. - President & Co-CIO
Thank you, Rob, and welcome, everyone. As a long-time sailor, I can certainly appreciate Byron's analogy of a boat navigating a storm.
I've done that in real life with my family aboard our sailboat, and during my 25-plus years of experience in the fixed-income markets, I've
often felt that sailing offers important lessons to me as an investor. I'll structure my comments today on our path through the storm, how
we're navigating it, our short-term views and strategy, and then I'll turn to our long-term outlook. The storm we are in represents a
transition from an era of low inflation, low-interest rates, financialization, leverage, globalization, peace, and a global pandemic. On the
other side of the storm is an environment where the amount and mix of all of these factors will be different, and there won't be new
factors to contend with. 
We believe the storm and its effects will present excellent long-term investment opportunities, but we have to navigate through the
storm first. We prepared for this environment with the highest level of liquidity in over 5 years and the highest allocation to the most
liquid instruments backed by U.S. real estate, agency-guaranteed residential mortgage-backed securities. Our TBA position has given us
flexibility and maneuverability to adjust risk. The financing markets are functioning in an orderly manner. Our counterparties have access
to liquidity, haircuts are stable. And from our perspective, there currently do not appear to be any signs of financing dislocation. We can
trade our highly liquid futures hedges 24/6. Our balance sheet is mark-to-market daily, so there is no mystery about the value of our
positions at the end of each day. 
We had anticipated that as global central banks withdrew liquidity and raised interest rates to combat inflation, the price of government
bonds and risky assets would adjust down. This price adjustment has been underway since September 2020. Treasuries and
mortgage-backed securities have led the way, and most of it has been orderly until this last quarter. So the storm really intensified in late
September and early October. You can see this in Agency RMBS spreads, which widened dramatically in September and have continued
the widening trend into the fourth quarter, now standing at levels within a few basis points of the peak spreads seen in March 2020, as
shown in our slide deck on Page 10. 
Simultaneously, the entire yield curve has shifted up. As of last Friday, the 2-year is 157 basis points higher, and the 10-year is 125 basis
points higher, just since June 30. This type of interest rate volatility has not been seen in the bond market since the early 1970s. You can
see this represented in the chart in the slide deck on Page 24. As the year has progressed, the ride has really gotten rougher. Now here's
what's unique about what's happened. In the traditional Fed tightening cycle, the yield curve inverts, the carry in Agency RMBS is
negative, and it's usually not a great investment environment until the next Fed easing cycle, but it is different this time. Mortgage rates
have been rising higher and faster than financing costs, causing spreads to widen to historically wide levels, making this the best
investment environment in Agency RMBS since the great financial crisis, and we expect this to continue. 
Now the recent moves are happening for several reasons. First, the structure of the Agency RMBS market is different. The largest
noneconomic buyer of agency RMBS, that is, the Fed, is stepping back, creating net supply into the market. And unlike at any other time
since the 1970s, there is no going away buyer. There's no GSEs. The banks are also out of the market, and they have no appetite for MBS
because their loan portfolios have grown. So now, the marginal bid for mortgages is now being driven by relative value players. This is
money managers. They are facing outflows. So the technical demand picture for MBS is the poorest it has been in several decades. 
Second, there has been selling of Agency RMBS by many types of accounts, including non-U.S.-based investors. Domestic money
managers continue to face net outflows from fixed income, and MBS are a liquid asset, and they are being sold first. So we expect this to
continue. And finally, we're seeing higher-than-normal levels of supply for the environment because loan sizes for next year are getting
baked in. origination pipelines are getting flushed, and we're seeing some cash-out activity that's keeping volume elevated. We do expect
this to reverse course over the next few months. So as the storm intensified, we used our instruments, our principles of risk management,
disciplined top-down analysis and a focus on capital preservation. 
In our last call, we discussed our strategy as being prepared for this rough ride with liquidity and dry powder as we entered an
environment of higher returns standing ready to deploy capital in what we saw as a persistent opportunity in Agency RMBS. We have
also repeatedly discussed the idea that we are in an environment where surprises are highly probable, and that we must be ready to
adjust as those occur. That posture and mindset has not changed. As the right became rougher here in October, with no shortage of
unexpected surprises from across the Atlantic, we made some tactical adjustments to the portfolio. Those reduced interest rate
sensitivity and some spread risk. And you can see the direct results of that on Pages 11 and 12 on our slide deck. The book value decline
we experienced in the third quarter is a function of these market moves, and mostly attributable to the gap wider by about 50 basis
points in Agency RMBS spreads in late September. 
Post quarter end, as spreads have continued to widen about 15 to 20 basis points across the coupons that we own, book value at the end
of last week was down about 8% to 10% versus the quarter end. Our liquidity is estimated at $430 million, and leverage to total capital is
approximately 7.2x. For your information, the book value during the quarter traded up as high as 7% up from the second quarter end
before ending the quarter down 15%. This should give you some idea of the volatility in spreads as well as the rebound potential in the
portfolio. So now, with the existing position, we hold more than enough liquidity and capital to withstand the spread shock that we saw
in 2008. 
As you can see on Chart 10, that is another 40 to 50 basis points wider from here in nominal spreads on the current coupon. We also
stress our portfolios to include haircut increases and other unanticipated calls on liquidity. We are keenly aware of the potential for
counterparty stress as well as the actions of other players in the market. And for those reasons and more, our view on the risk
environment has shifted to a more cautious stance going into year-end. We've also rolled about 20% of our repo book over year-end, and
we continue to term out financing to minimize year-end issues. Let's now look ahead. What usually comes after storms is some type of
calming of disease. It's important to look and plan ahead with an intermediate-term view to steer the boat to its destination. 
At some point, the Fed will signal a pause or stop tightening. When that happens, there will be a period of lower volatility and evaluation.
This is where we see a target-rich environment, which persists for some time. Agency RMBS returns are already in the high teens and low
20s, and we're really looking forward to getting to that target-rich environment, but we're not there yet. The key is being able to navigate
through this rough ride in the near term to get to the longer-term stronger fundamental and technical environment. So we see at least 4
positive catalysts for Agency RMBS in the intermediate term. The first one, very simply, is the raw return in Agency RMBS. This can be a
major catalyst. 5.5% to 6.5% base case yields, we haven't seen those in at least 15 years.
These are great returns relative to a lot of other risky assets today and will likely be great returns in the future once you adjust for liquidity
and credit risk. Second, lower net supply in the future. We are approaching a seasonal winter slowdown. Mortgage rates are at or near
7%. This will eventually slow originations to at least 50% of current levels, shrinking the overall net supply, forming a technical tailwind.
Third, any decline in the realized volatility is also a tailwind for RMBS and will take spreads tighter. And finally, if a recession indeed
materializes, Agency RMBS will be the credit risk-free asset to own versus riskier corporate and consumer back debt. 
A few other points on the intermediate term. At current levels, MBS offer almost 200 basis points of spread over treasuries at nominal
interest rates that have not been seen for credit risk-free asset in decades. These returns require less leverage to earn mid-teens or higher
returns. Going forward, the mortgage market will be operating without a stabilizing agent, such as the Fed or the GSEs. This means
spread volatility could be higher, but at the same time, returns will be higher. This is why we're calling the opportunity persistent.
And finally, the demand for income remains strong. Global demographics still favor income-producing investments, and especially in the
absence of a permanently rising stock market, investors may finally seek fixed-income instruments at these higher yields. This is what
can eventually turn the tide of money manager selling as inflows return into bond funds. So for now, while we've positioned the portfolio
to a more neutral stance, we're also thinking about what the catalyst is for adding risk as we navigate through this near-term poor
technical backdrop to the longer-term stronger fundamental and technical backdrop for mortgages. 
An additional word on our positioning. We expect to be active across both our assets and our hedges over time. You can think of it as the
position designed to weather the storm that will change as time goes on. The beauty of a flexible strategy with TBAs in the position is our
ability to change as the market changes. As we continue to evolve our portfolio structure, we will provide additional timely disclosures to
be fully transparent as we transition to a more long-term position. Until then, you can see by the numbers. We've moved to shield the
portfolio from large moves in interest rates and cut our spread risk. I remind you to grade us by our long-term total economic
performance and that EAD alone is an incomplete metric to assess economic performance or dividend stability. As Rob mentioned,
substantial hedge gains exist in the portfolio to support our forward dividend. 
A final word on the dividend and forward returns on Page 13 of the deck. As of last week, the weighted average market forward yield of
our portfolio is approximately 5.4%, and we are hedged with treasuries yielding about 4.2%. This produces 120 basis points of net spread
at 8x leverage to common, a forward ROE of about 15%. This is the foundation of the economic return that supports our dividend. It will
not be evident in earnings available for distribution because that does not include the benefit of our futures. It will show up mostly in
book value and in taxable income. In addition, just the current portfolio will add $0.70 per share in book value for every 10 basis points of
spread tightening from these very wide levels, further boosting the forward return. Any incremental return will be driven by adding assets
during this persistent and attractive investment opportunity in Agency RMBS, for which we are prepared. We expect to eventually return
to a diversified portfolio over time as new opportunities evolve. 
I'd like to leave you with the following thoughts. We are liquid, and we are prepared for the storm that we are in. We expect the rough
ride to continue for some time, and we've moved to mitigate interest rate risk and preserve capital as we navigate through this
short-term transition to what we believe will be a highly favorable investment environment. MBS spreads are wide and returns are in the
19% to 25% range on the margin. While this is a target-rich environment, we would like to see the levels of macro risks subside to change
and add significant risks. In the intermediate term, we expect MBS to outperform many other asset classes as fundamentals and
technical shift. This is the environment when book value can be recovered. We take our responsibility of capital stewardship very
seriously, and the team and I remain focused on making the next decision to maximize value on your behalf. I'm truly grateful for your
trust and confidence. And with that, I'll turn it over to Byron.
 
Byron L. Boston
Dynex Capital, Inc. - CEO, Co-CIO & Director
Thanks, Smriti. Let me remind you again this is a historical moment that is evolving as we transition to a new global economic market
and geopolitical environment. I want to also remind you that we have built Dynex Capital to expand the surprise market gyrations that
we're encountering during this transitional period. We're committed to providing long-term attractive returns to our investors, and our
focus on these long-term returns has not wavered in this environment. Take note of our track record as displayed on Slide 15. Dynex has
proven to be a better cash-generating alternative to many other debt and financial alternatives through all cycles over the past 15 years.
This is not our first storm, and this will not be our last. And just as in the past, we're prepared to remain patient and disciplined until the
sun comes out. 
Finally, we're in the boat with you. Both management and the Board are comfortable owning both Dynex Capital's common and
preferred stock as we ride out this current transitional period in history. The stormy environment will evolve, this transitional period will
end, and we will have the flexibility to adjust our posture to a more offensive stance to take advantage of these truly attractive return
opportunities. So with that, operator, we can open the call up for questions.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) And your first question is from the line of Doug Harter with Credit Suisse.
 
Douglas Michael Harter
Crédit Suisse AG, Research Division - Director
As you guys looked and balanced kind of the short term and the intermediate to long term, can you go to how you kind of arrived at that
7x leverage that you talked about and that you are at currently?
 
Byron L. Boston
Dynex Capital, Inc. - CEO, Co-CIO & Director
Doug, I didn't quite hear that. State it over again?
 
Douglas Michael Harter
Crédit Suisse AG, Research Division - Director
Sure. Kind of as you guys look to balance kind of the short term versus the attractive intermediate to long term, can you just talk about
how you kind of arrived at the current leverage level?
 
Smriti Laxman Popenoe
Dynex Capital, Inc. - President & Co-CIO
Yes. So it's a function of 2 things, right? The level of spreads where they are today relative to where we think they could go, that's the first
thing. We're being very respectful of the technicals in the mortgage market and the probability here. I think as I said on the call, the
catalyst for things to go tighter are fewer than the catalyst for things to go wider in the near term. So that 7x leverage reflects the ability
of the portfolio to really withstand substantial further widening in spreads. And we believe that's the appropriate position as we navigate
the next few months. So the things that we take into account, where are spreads today, where could spreads go in the near term, how
much liquidity and capital do we want to have to be positioned with that? How much leverage do we want going into that? And then
finally, as I mentioned, sometimes in the storm is when you can actually get most of your opportunities. We want to make sure that we're
positioned in a way that we're not hampering our ability to take that offensive posture when the opportunity does come.
 
Douglas Michael Harter
Crédit Suisse AG, Research Division - Director
And when that opportunity comes, I guess, where would you feel comfortable taking leverage, kind of when you think that some of those
catalysts are starting to play out?
 
Smriti Laxman Popenoe
Dynex Capital, Inc. - President & Co-CIO
Yes. Look, that's like the $90,000 question, which people have been asking us since July, right? And we have actually faced a lot of
pressure from our investors and others saying, "When are you going to take leverage up? How much are you going to take leverage up?"
And I think the right answer to that is it depends. It depends on what the market is doing at that time. And what I can tell our investors
and I can tell you, and you've seen us do this now, time and again, is when the opportunity presents itself, we will take advantage of it. It's
going to be in the context of the broader macro environment. And if we believe the risk-return trade-off is positive, that leverage will go
up, right? So it's always going to be made in the context of that decision. And what I can tell you right now, we said in the deck. We think
we have somewhere between 2 and 4 turns of incremental dry powder. That's what we hope to deploy, but we'll do it slowly, and we'll do
it prudently.
 
Byron L. Boston
Dynex Capital, Inc. - CEO, Co-CIO & Director
Let me add one other thing. Yes. I mean one other thing on this, Doug. You heard Smriti tell you how broad our book value swung during
the quarter. And so we're sitting here, and the world starts to change, the environment changes, and we're looking at a book value that
could potentially going to be materially higher than where we sit. That's going to have a material impact on where leverage happens to
be. We'll take that into account in terms of how we're managing the portfolio. So we're not sitting here thinking in terms of a static
moment in time. You can see how much volatility that's in the marketplace now.
But really take note about that big win in book value because we were up book value solidly at the end of August, right? And so it's pretty
fascinating to see this. With the book value up that high, the leverage goes down immediately. The 1 2 turns potentially. So very
important that we're thinking in terms of a top-down approach, where, if spreads are held at 20 to 30 basis points tighter, leverages had
to down. We're not going to wait until they get there to make the appropriate adjustments and investors as we think about it. So just to
add that little piece in there to give you some more clarity.
 
Operator
Your next question is from the line of Bose George with KBW.
 
Bose Thomas George
Keefe, Bruyette, & Woods, Inc., Research Division - MD
Actually, just sticking to the theme of leverage. Obviously, with spreads wider here, your market-to-market leverage has increased,
impact of the envelope is that the market-to-market leverage is around 95% now. And you noted that there is the risk that spreads widen
further. With that backdrop, how willing are you or what's kind of the range you're willing to let your market-to-market leverage kind of
run-up to, and I mean, is there -- because I guess the concern is there's some level at which you might want to deliver. And that clearly
sort of removes some of the up side when spreads tighten. So just kind of how you're thinking about that.
 
Smriti Laxman Popenoe
Dynex Capital, Inc. - President & Co-CIO
Yes. So Bose, we did talk about the adjustments that we made in the portfolio. As of the end of last week, our leverage is actually down.
From quarter-end leverage, the total capital that we disclosed was 7.2x during my comments. So we have taken the opportunity to
actually not take the write-up on the entire portfolio to further spread widening. And I think that's what we believe is the right approach
here coming into what we still see is going to be a rough ride here through year-end. And again, in terms of like how high would you let it,
that type of decision at this point is almost like a day-to-day moment-to-moment decision. If we believe the market environment requires
further deleveraging, we're going to do that, right? But as of now, we're operating with enough liquidity and capital, more than enough
liquidity and capital to withstand basically a spread widening out to the peak of 2008 and beyond. So the liquidity position will be able to
withstand that. Whether or not we actually choose to allow it to do that is a function of where we actually see the market environment
evolving.
Now in the intermediate term, we are saying the environment is going to improve for all the reasons I outlined in the call, right? You've
got raw returns that are really outstanding. You've got supply that's coming down. And ultimately, unfortunately, the people who are
selling bonds in this market are selling what we own. And when all this is over, they're going to want them all back. So at that point, it's
going to be nice to have that. So it's a delicate line walking to say you want to -- you don't want to be in the position of giving up a lot of
that upside when it eventually comes. But you got to get there. You got to make it there intact, and we're very, very cognizant of the risks
involved with that. And so we haven't allowed our leverage to float up. We've made that adjustment, and that's part of how we're
navigating this. And Byron, I think you want to add.
 
Byron L. Boston
Dynex Capital, Inc. - CEO, Co-CIO & Director
Yes, let me add something to this. From the last 2 questions, Bob's and Doug, as this -- when we say we went up in credit and up in
liquidity, we increased liquidity on the balance sheet such that from 50 basis points on the team here, this ride, we've sat here and we've
had plenty of liquidity not to worry about making adjustments to the portfolio because leverage is moving around or because margin
costs have come in. We've been very easily actually managing our balance sheet. And Smriti have a problem saying this easily because
they feel the stress that the investment team, as all investment teams do in the world with this type of market volatility. But in terms of
the way I'm listening to your line of question around leverage, leverage will pressure those companies that don't have enough liquidity
because they will scramble as leverage is moving to meet their liquidity. And if you look at their internal operations, they'll be scrambling.
We don't have that issue because we went up in credit and up in liquidity. You can see all the decisions we made over the years. to have
enough liquidity to deal with a surprising environment. 
And the real key is that as leverage moves around, we may make very tactical decisions, but it won't have anything to do with needing
liquidity. It will have something to do with the risk posture we're taking. Your best example is March 2020. They operated in exactly the
same way. We had a ton of liquidity. We didn't worry about any type of margin calls. We adjusted the portfolio of 2 or 3x within that major
storm and by the end of the year, everything was fine. So if you need a benchmark, go back and look at how we made decisions in 2020.
Look how we made them in 2019 before 2020, and look how we made in 2020. Thank you.
 
Bose Thomas George
Keefe, Bruyette, & Woods, Inc., Research Division - MD
Okay. Great. That's helpful. And then actually just one on the funding markets. Any changes you're seeing there, volatility, haircuts,
anything to comment on?
 
Smriti Laxman Popenoe
Dynex Capital, Inc. - President & Co-CIO
The answer to that is no. The Agency RMBS repo market has been very, very stable. We've had 0 haircut issues. The market is functioning
in a very orderly manner. So no issues there.
 
Operator
Your next question is from the line of Trevor Cranston with JMP Securities.
 
Trevor John Cranston
JMP Securities LLC, Research Division - MD & Equity Research Analyst
A question on the change in sensitivities you guys are showing as of October versus where you were at the end of the quarter. Can you go
into some detail on what the changes you've made to hedge portfolio and the asset composition or that have kind of led to that material
change, particularly in the rate exposures?
 
Smriti Laxman Popenoe
Dynex Capital, Inc. - President & Co-CIO
Right. Yes. So a big portion of that is a combination of 2 things. It's a combination of hedges that we put on and second, a reduction in
the credit spread sensitivity. So some reduction in the level of assets, some increase in the level of hedges. And Trevor, what we're doing
is making these adjustments sort of in real-time. And what we commit to do on this call is as we make those adjustments and we
complete making those adjustments, we'll actually give more detail around exactly what those moves were over time. So suffice it to say,
what we're really trying to demonstrate in those 2 slides is: number one; as it relates to interest rate sensitivity, that's substantially down
versus quarter end; and then as it relates to sensitivity to credit spreads, that's down some, right? But on a percentage basis, less than
the interest rate sensitivity in the book.
 
Trevor John Cranston
JMP Securities LLC, Research Division - MD & Equity Research Analyst
Okay. Got it. And then the question was on the coupon composition of the portfolio, given how much rates have moved, obviously, the
coupon's to show in the portfolio as of September 30, anyways, are all trading at meaningful discounts. I guess on the margin as you
guys are deploying capital, can you talk about like if you guys are looking at deploying into current coupons or if you're still kind of
focused on more discount securities?
 
Smriti Laxman Popenoe
Dynex Capital, Inc. - President & Co-CIO
Yes. And that's a great question. And one of the things that -- the principles that you've probably seen us now follow for a few years is
you want to generally try to have instruments that are, I'm going to say, hedgeable in that you know the duration or you're trying to
estimate the duration as well as possible. The amazing thing about the coupons that we have owned and continue to own is that right
now, with everything trading below a $95 price, most of those coupons are fully extended. And so the duration of those is not hard to
estimate. And that's a really nice position to have in this volatile interest rate environment.
So I'm very comfortable positioning us in that manner until we get through this transitional peer now. As we go through the transition,
we're evaluating all kinds of things, right? So yes, current coupons, we are evaluating that. There's risk and reward associated in the
current coupon, as well as the lower coupon. So the trade-off is always going to be what's the incremental return that I'm getting or the
risk that I'm taking. And yes, current coupons offer more return, but there's a different type of risk that's involved, and there will be a time
and a place to put that risk on the balance sheet. We haven't felt like that's appropriate yet, but that is exactly the type of offensive
thought process that we're going through at the moment.
 
Operator
Your next question is from the line of Jason Stewart with JonesTrading.
 
Jason Michael Stewart
JonesTrading Institutional Services, LLC, Research Division - Senior VP & Financial Services Analyst
I wanted to ask about the cost to operate in a sort of defensive lower leverage environment and how you guys are thinking about that.
 
Byron L. Boston
Dynex Capital, Inc. - CEO, Co-CIO & Director
When you say the cost to operate, Jade, do you mean just the overall cost of running the business?
 
Jason Michael Stewart
JonesTrading Institutional Services, LLC, Research Division - Senior VP & Financial Services Analyst
Correct.
 
Byron L. Boston
Dynex Capital, Inc. - CEO, Co-CIO & Director
Our cost levels are basically the same in terms of just, it hasn't increased in cost for having this type of market volatility where the cost
comes on our time. Our focus level is at a materially higher level in terms of our personal time and how much time we're focused on the
markets. You go from kind of normal workdays to a 24/7 type of environment, but in terms of just the cost fronting the business. We have
a long-term perspective. And we're putting the right amount of money into our business to ensure that we are in great shape 1, 2, 3, 5
and 10 years, short term, medium and long term. 
So we're making some major changes in terms of our technology platform and other different areas that were really a year from now, 2
years from now, proved extremely beneficial. Furthermore, back to us believing that surprises are highly probable and the world has
become more complex, we started to make these types of technology changes to put us in better shape to manage this type of market
environment, the exact market environment. So this environment doesn't have any impact in terms of the overall cost of doing business.
Our focus on the long term is still exactly the same. We're investing in people, processes and technology to build a sustainable
organization over the long term. We believe that the world needs a solid asset management team like Dynex Capital, especially
cash-generating vehicles such as this. So I hope that gives you some insight.
 
Jason Michael Stewart
JonesTrading Institutional Services, LLC, Research Division - Senior VP & Financial Services Analyst
No, that's great. I think that's perfect. I wanted to ask you 2 other quick questions. One, any expected changes that you guys think come
out of FHFA given this environment?
 
Smriti Laxman Popenoe
Dynex Capital, Inc. - President & Co-CIO
Great question. Yes. I mean, I think this is the environment in which they open up the credit box, to potentially change the affordability
picture for -- as mortgage rates are up here at 7%. We're looking at the loan size issue. Obviously, that is something that will come up
here towards year-end. Those are 2 big factors. Nothing in the news so far that we can see where there's been movement towards
opening up that credit box. We're looking at the November elections. That's going to be something that we're focused on as potential
signaling of how this might evolve over the next 2 years. So right now, I think nothing is on the radar as far as we can see in terms of any
major changes here.
 
Byron L. Boston
Dynex Capital, Inc. - CEO, Co-CIO & Director
Can I add one other thing? This is just a buying comment. You asked it out in public, so I'm going to make a comment. As a country, the
agency security is a phenomenal asset for the United States. I would like our government and our FHFA to make Freddie Mac temporary
stabilizing agencies for this market. They don't have to grow the portfolio like they did before, but it's ludicrous to have these
organizations sitting there when they could actually be a stabilizing agent and ensuring that these markets trade smoothly. The
mortgage market has traded anything but smoothly over the last few months. They can play a minor role. They could have played a
minor role in March 2020, and I think it would have been a lot easier. 
So as you talk to government regulators, bring that issue up. I worked at Freddie Mac. I know a role they can play. They don't need to play
the big portfolio role they played before, but they can play a stabilizing agent in terms of how the agency mortgage market trades. And I
would hope that one day, our regulators, FHFA or whoever else, will understand that.
 
Jason Michael Stewart
JonesTrading Institutional Services, LLC, Research Division - Senior VP & Financial Services Analyst
Last one for me. How are you guys looking at buybacks on common or preferred versus investment opportunities? I mean, both present
pretty good opportunities in my view right now.
 
Smriti Laxman Popenoe
Dynex Capital, Inc. - President & Co-CIO
Long-term returns at 19% to 25% marginal returns are -- buybacks make sense when your investment opportunities relative to your cost
of capital are inverted. That's not the case right now. And so again, this is an investment environment in which we're going to want to
hold and deploy capital.
 
Operator
Your next question is from the line of Eric Hagen with BTIG.
 
Eric J. Hagen
BTIG, LLC, Research Division - Research Analyst
Just a couple more on the relative value within the coupon stack and how you guys think about managing liquidity, just in light of the
paydown differential for securities across the stack and how you mix that with TBAs and pools. And then on the funding side, is there any
value in borrowing with longer-term repo right now? Can you comment on the liquidity that you see for repo along the yield curve?
 
Smriti Laxman Popenoe
Dynex Capital, Inc. - President & Co-CIO
Yes. I'll answer your second question first, Eric. We -- I think the idea that you can borrow across term is something that we've used very
flexibly and well here at Dynex. And it continues to be sort of a mainstay of how we get through the quarter-end and so on and so forth.
So there is a term premium that is currently being charged in the markets to go through year-end. It is actually not as big as the term
premiums that we've seen in the past for the year-end turn. But there is a premium, and I think that's a big piece. The other thing that
you're seeing is substantial amounts of uncertainty in the repo market with respect to when the Fed will make their 75 basis point hike
move or the 50 basis point hike move or 75%. So there's a lot of just price discovery that's going on for November and December and
beyond with respect to the magnitude of rate hikes. So -- but none of that has prevented us from: a, being able to term out our financing;
or b, just the availability of financing. So we are able to term things out. Financing is available. We've not seen any issues with respect to
haircuts or anything like that. We are seeing a term structure to those interest rates, as you would expect. 
But again, not a problem with respect to actually how we operate. So your first question regarding relative value in (inaudible). So here's
really how we're thinking about it. The first principle is just the principle of risk management. When you have coupons that are fully
extended, and the prepayment risk is more or less baked into the price, they're much easier to hedge. So holding the lower coupons
primarily is just simply a function of saying, I can -- I know what the duration is, and I'm able to hedge those instruments with
instruments that are like that, like futures and so on and so forth.
So that's the primary driver of owning coupons that are below par. Now over time, that will shift. That will shift because the carry-in
higher coupons is higher. It will shift because of many other reasons, prepayments on the lower coupons could shift, it becomes lower, so
on and so forth. So that is sort of the next decision to be made. And as you know, like in these higher coupons, you have more
prepayment risk. You have more extension risk. You have more contraction rate. There's more convexity. So that relative value at this
point is still sort of a thought process that we're going through. The higher coupons do offer more current returns. But the hedgeability of
them, all of that is still in question because we're still in a transitional period.
Anyone who bought higher coupons in this move, as you've gone from 2.5% to 4%, and you thought you could hedge them with whatever
duration your model said, that's been a very, very difficult trade. And for us sitting in the lower coupons with a more extended profile,
that's been sort of a big stabilizer as we've gone up in interest rates here. It's also much more exacerbated when you see rates up spreads
wider in the current coupon versus the lower coupon. So as we're thinking about relative value, the #1 thing is, can I hedge it, and how
can I hedge it? That's first because we're still in the transitional period. The time to have the relative value discussion, of course, is all the
time. But you then -- once you're approaching the end of that transitional period, that's when we'll be thinking through more about
where do we play off and how we play often.
Now don't get me wrong. We're thinking about this all the time, but that's kind of the way we're approaching this. It's not an environment
where you can just sit here and say, "Well, let me just own the highest coupons because that's what I think is fundamentally the right
thing to do. You can't have that discussion without understanding that that's a macro risk decision, and that's what's really driving the
way we're thinking right now.
 
Eric J. Hagen
BTIG, LLC, Research Division - Research Analyst
That's good. I appreciate that. With respect to the comments around the dividend and such, are we hearing that your dividend will most
likely be characterized as a return of capital for both 2022 and '23? And any guidance, I suppose, on that.
 
Alison G. Griffin
Dynex Capital, Inc. - VP of IR
Yes. Thanks, Eric. No, we're not saying that at all because the hedge gains, in particular, that would all be ordinary income and will be
part of the distribution calculation. So yes, we're not saying that at all. And we're going to provide -- continue to provide color on our
hedge gains and the impact on that to the portfolio to financing into taxable results so everyone can understand where we are, we can be
transparent, people in your seat can model out where we are and kind of understand the direction that we're going in.
 
Operator
Your next question is from the line of Christopher Nolan with Ladenburg Thalmann.
 
Christopher Whitbread Patrick Nolan
Ladenburg Thalmann & Co. Inc., Research Division - EVP of Equity Research
Are you continuing to issue any shares into the fourth quarter here?
 
Byron L. Boston
Dynex Capital, Inc. - CEO, Co-CIO & Director
Did you say... Are we...
 
Christopher Whitbread Patrick Nolan
Ladenburg Thalmann & Co. Inc., Research Division - EVP of Equity Research
Issuing shares?
 
Byron L. Boston
Dynex Capital, Inc. - CEO, Co-CIO & Director
With our price this fall. This type of chaotic market, Chris, I appreciate you asking this question. This type of chaos says you hunker down
on all aspects of the balance sheet, and you wait out the storm. That's the purpose. We pulled this analogy of the boat out for a very
strong reason. Smriti is a sailor, and Tom Akin, who was CEO before this is a sailor. We're serious. In a storm, you hunkered down the
bulk, put down anchor, and you wake the storm out. This is on both sides of the balance sheet here. And so no, the short answer is I
couldn't answer that to say the period now. As of right now, we're in a storm. If the storm took an interesting twist mid-September. That's
the other key point here is that if you lead them to a zone where we are patient on all aspects of the balance sheet. So you want to make
sure everyone understands this point about what we're seeing. We've talked about a whole tone, coupons or vol. The bottom line is
mid-September with the chaotic British situation along with the labs inflation number, created complete chaos and market trading
across the globe, treasuries, mortgages, corporate, whatever you want to mention. 
And in a situation like that, a smart bolder hunkers down and weights the storm out. That's what we're doing in Dynex. If you want to
take away any message from here, you say, they'll weigh the storm out. They have a boat that's built for a storm, and we got the ability to
weigh the storm out because we built the boat with plenty of liquidity starting multiple years ago.
 
Operator
And at this time, there are no further questions. I will now turn the call back to Byron for any closing remarks.
 
Byron L. Boston
Dynex Capital, Inc. - CEO, Co-CIO & Director
Thank you all. I really appreciate you being here. Thank you for the questions. Stay tuned. We'll be transparent. We're hunkered down,
and we really appreciate all of our shareholders in the company. Thank you very much, and we look forward to chatting with you at our
next call.
 
Operator
This concludes the Dynex Capital Third Quarter 2022 Earnings Conference Call. Thank you for your participation. You may now
disconnect.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
©2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.