CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
Christopher A. Kollme
Piedmont Office Realty Trust, Inc. - EVP of Investments & Strategy
 
Christopher Brent Smith
Piedmont Office Realty Trust, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
 
Edward H. Guilbert
Piedmont Office Realty Trust, Inc. - Executive VP of Finance, Treasurer & Assistant Secretary
 
George M. Wells
Piedmont Office Realty Trust, Inc. - Executive VP & COO
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
Anthony Paolone
JPMorgan Chase & Co, Research Division - Senior Analyst
 
Daniel Ismail
Green Street Advisors, LLC, Research Division - Senior Analyst of Office
 
Nicholas Patrick Thillman
Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division - Research Associate
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Good day, ladies and gentlemen, and welcome to the Piedmont Office Realty Trust Third Quarter 2022 Earnings Conference Call.
(Operator Instructions) It is now my pleasure to turn the floor over to your host, Eddie Guilbert. Sir, the floor is yours.
 
Edward H. Guilbert
Piedmont Office Realty Trust, Inc. - Executive VP of Finance, Treasurer & Assistant Secretary
Thank you, operator, and good morning, everyone. We appreciate you joining us today for Piedmont's Third Quarter 2022 Earnings
Conference Call. Last night, we filed our 10-Q and an 8-K that includes our earnings release and our unaudited supplemental
information for the third quarter that's available for your review on our website at piedmontreit.com under the Investor Relations section.
During this call, you'll hear from senior officers at Piedmont. -- their prepared remarks, followed by answers to your questions will
contain forward-looking statements as defined in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
These forward-looking statements address matters which are subject to risks and uncertainties, and therefore, actual results may differ
from those we anticipate and discuss today. The risks and uncertainties of these forward-looking statements are discussed in our press
release as well as our SEC filings. We encourage everyone to review the more detailed discussion related to risks associated with
forward-looking statements in our SEC filings. Examples of forward-looking statements include those related to Piedmont's future
revenues and operating income, dividends and financial guidance, future leasing and investment activity and the impact of this activity
on the company's financial and operational results.
You should not place any undue reliance on any of these forward-looking statements, and these statements speak as of the date they are
made. Also on today's call, representatives of the company may refer to certain non-GAAP financial measures such as FFO, core FFO,
AFFO and same-store NOI. The definitions and reconciliations of these non-GAAP measures are contained in the earnings release and in
the supplemental financial information, which were filed last night. At this time, our President and Chief Executive Officer, Brent Smith,
will provide some opening comments. Brent?
 
Christopher Brent Smith
Piedmont Office Realty Trust, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Good morning, and thank you again for joining us on today's call as we review our financial and operating results for the third quarter of
2022. In addition to Eddie, on the line with me this morning are George Wells, our Chief Operating Officer; Chris Kollme, our EVP of
Investments; and Bobby Bowers, our Chief Financial Officer; as well as other members of the senior management team. During the third
quarter, Piedmont executed over 440,000 square feet of leasing at meaningfully higher rental rates with almost 1/3 related to new
tenant leasing. In addition, the company delivered solid financial results in line with the quarter's consensus estimates.
Also, we completed a very strategic acquisition and laid the groundwork for 2 important dispositions. Notwithstanding these
accomplishments, the broader economic environment continues to pose numerous challenges to the commercial real estate sector. This
results from a number of factors, including the impact of remote work, rapidly rising interest rates and inflation as well as concerns
regarding a recession. Despite these headwinds, we remain optimistic and realistic about our leasing prospects our prudent investment
strategy in targeted growth markets and our overall operating performance.
Our current leasing pipeline remains stable with over 300,000 square feet currently in documentation and over 150,000 square feet of
leasing already executed in the fourth quarter, positioning us to close 2022 with over 2 million square feet of completed leasing and the
portfolio approximately at 87% leased. In short, we believe Piedmont's focus on high-quality assets in many rich working environments
will allow us to continue to attract and retain tenants and our well-capitalized balance sheet provides us with the operating flexibility to
successfully navigate these challenging times. With that, I'll turn it over to George, Chris and Bobby to provide further details on the
quarter. George?
 
George M. Wells
Piedmont Office Realty Trust, Inc. - Executive VP & COO
Thanks, Brent, and good morning, everyone. Despite the usual summer travel impact, along with the growing macroeconomic
uncertainty that Brent alluded to, our operational teams delivered solid third quarter results on many fronts, and leasing momentum
remains solid. We're still seeing demand from a broad range of industries, particularly the financial, legal, health care and business
services sectors. Workspace utilization in our portfolio continues to increase incrementally and it's up to 50% in September. And
nationally, there is a growing course of companies setting the stage for greater in-office participation by removing vaccine mandates,
increasing the number of required in-person days or enhancing the office experience with additional incentives or amenities.
We believe our operating strategy is providing a highly amenitized modern working environment is a critical component in meeting
today's corporate light to quality objectives, which is not only appealing to leasing prospects with new space needs, but also to attracting
and retaining employees for existing tenants and for drawing employees back into the office. And we believe the merits of this strategy is
showing up in our leasing results. Workforce priorities have shifted post COVID, there's a much higher conservative quality of life, home
ownership, work life balance and shorter commute times. Our premier assets complement these needs and are located in growth areas,
most of which are easily accessible suburban and infill submarkets. This quarter, we completed over 50 transactions for approximately
444,000 square feet of total overall volume. Of this, exactly half or 25 of these leases totaling 124,000 square feet were related to new
tenant lease activity and expansions.
While the volume of new deal activity was good, the total square foot lease did not reach the level of the past few quarters. We largely
attribute this to the first part of the summer when historically, we have seen some slowdown in general business activity due to vacation,
travel season and that smaller businesses continue to make corporate decisions quicker than larger corporations. As Brent already
noted, our pipeline activity is strong, and we anticipate that new leasing in the fourth quarter will be back at pre-pandemic levels. I will
note, our leasing economics were very favorable with approximately 33% and 38% roll-up or increase in rents for the quarter on a cash
and accrual basis, respectively. Our weighted average lease term at the end of the third quarter is approximately 6 years.
Our lease percentage at the end of the third quarter was approximately 87%, up 150 basis points from year-end and largely unchanged
from the close of the previous quarter. While the majority of new lease activity continues to emanate from our Sunbelt portfolio, where
over 70% of our vacancies reside, we are experiencing good leasing activity in all of our spike markets. Now I'd like to highlight a few key
accomplishments that have occurred in some of our operating markets this quarter. Beginning with Atlanta, our portfolio experienced
the most form of new activity with 10 deals for nearly 35,000 square feet. Atlanta has been Piedmont's most consistent performer for the
past 4 quarters, capturing 43% of all new tenant transactions, and the pipeline continues to be quite robust. In fact, we've already signed
6 more new deals in October for another 57,000 square feet, including a well-known Atlanta financial services firm, which is relocated in
their regional headquarters into our lead Gold 999 Peachtree property from the Buckhead submarket.
I would add that our building was selected by that tenant over a newly completed development in the Midtown submarket, primarily
because of its superior location and sustainability designation. Adding to Atlanta's already well-known Pro business reputation was
Money Magazine's recent ranking of best places to live in the United States with Atlanta taking the top spot. We are excited to be
growing here with the recent acquisition of our lead Platinum 1180 Peach Street AA trophy tower in which Chris Kollme would touch on in
just a moment.
Atlanta is our largest market, accounting for 26% of our ALR at the end of September, and the flight to quality is very evident here. And
we anticipate continued strong lease production in the quarters ahead. Coming to Dallas, we're happy to announce the extension of the
entire Ryan lease at our lead certified 3 Galleria office tower. The economics of this 178,000 square foot deal were strong with significant
rental rate roll-ups on both a cash and accrual basis, no free rent and no tenant improvement allowances. That extension will expire in
phases over the next 2 to 5 years. Also noteworthy is the completion of 9 new lease deals totaling 32,000 square feet spread amongst
the remainder of our Dallas assets.
One of those deals was in an approximate 9,000 square foot expansion of an existing tenant. -- evidence businesses in this dynamic
market are continuing to grow despite the cloudy economic environment. Our Minneapolis holdings were quite active this quarter with 3
new tenant transactions for 50,000 square feet, including our largest new tenant leasing deal for this quarter, a headquarter relocation
into our lead gold Preston Ridge asset for 35,000 square feet. That new user, a financial services firm will double in size from its existing
location. And interestingly, we'll have all staff working in person 100% of the time. Our monetization efforts at Creston Ridge are paying
off, having completed 4 new lease transactions in the past few quarters and a robust pipeline that should stabilize occupancy there soon.
Moving downtown to our lead gold trophy tower, U.S. Bancorp Center, our team there signed a new lease to the white table cloth
seafood restaurant for a 10-year term, adding to our already robust set of on-site amenities. -- lease extension conversations are ongoing
with our anchor tenant there at U.S. Bank, and we believe negotiations with the bank at this downtown assets and at (inaudible) crossing
in the suburbs will accelerate the bank once the bank completed its merger with Union Bank anticipated at year-end. The PMO formula
continues to demonstrate leasing success, particularly with smaller tenants, the most active customer segment across all of our markets.
These tenants are driven to our office projects citing their ease of accessibility, fast amenity base, unique tenant engagement
programming, best-in-class conference facilities, along with a sustainability minded operator. As noted in a recent CBRE report, owners
are witnessing increased demand for lead designated assets, which are also generating a meaningful rental premium on average of 4%
with a difference even more substantial in suburban markets. Looking ahead to the remainder of 2022 and into 2023, we remain
optimistic about the leasing performance of our portfolio. Tour activity continues to be strong and consistent. We have approximately 2
million square feet of outstanding proposals, which is in line with the past 4 quarters.
With only a few leases expiring for the remainder of the year, we expect positive net space absorption in the fourth quarter, resulting in
an anticipated year-end lease percentage around 87%. Additionally, expirations are low next year with only 1 lease larger than 100,000
square feet that will not expire until December of 2023. In conclusion, I do want to mention that Pima has invested in a number of our
assets over the last few years, improving amenity offerings and modernizing lobbies and elevators and the like to compete on an
attractive basis with any new build. A large portion of this redevelopment has now been completed, and we have no exposure to inflation
associated with granular development, and we will focus on redevelopment, which we believe is a better risk-adjusted return. I'll now
turn the call over to Chris Kollme to review our third quarter investment activity. Chris?
 
Christopher A. Kollme
Piedmont Office Realty Trust, Inc. - EVP of Investments & Strategy
Thank you, George. As we disclosed on last quarter's call, we entered into a binding contract to purchase 1180 Peach tree Street in the
heart of Midtown Atlanta for a purchase price of approximately $465 million, including the assumption of an approximately $200
million, 4.1% fixed rate secured mortgage, which matures in 2028. I'm pleased to report that we have closed on the acquisition of what
we believe is the highest quality, most differentiated office setting in Atlanta. At almost 700,000 square feet, 1180 Peach Street is a lead
platinum skyline defining asset with a weighted average lease term of over 7 years and in-place rents at approximately 20% below
market rates.
The initial accrual basis NOI yield for the transaction is 6.3%. Piedmont is now one of the largest owners in Midtown, accumulating a
position of over 1.3 million square feet within just the last 12 months. If you haven't already done so, I'd encourage you to review the
materials on our website, which offer more complete details about this acquisition. We anticipate ultimately funding the 1180 acquisition
using sale proceeds generated from noncore asset dispositions. And after quarter end, we have agreed to terms for the disposition of our
2 assets in Cambridge, Massachusetts to 2 separate buyers. Both groups are nearing completion of their diligence periods.
These transactions are on an all-cash basis with no financing contingencies. We anticipate recognizing an approximate 9-digit book gain
on a consolidated basis. As for the balance of 2022, given current market conditions and our temporary leverage levels, our capital
markets initiatives will be principally concentrated when evaluating additional dispositions of noncore assets. That said, we will be
patient and we will be disciplined as today's market environment is certainly challenging for both buyers and sellers. With that, I'll turn it
over to Bobby to walk you through the financial highlights of the quarter and address guidance for the remainder of 2022. Bobby?
 
George M. Wells
Piedmont Office Realty Trust, Inc. - Executive VP & COO
Thank you, Chris. I'll discuss some of our financial highlights for the quarter, but I encourage you to please review the entire earnings
release and supplemental financial information, which were filed last night for more complete details. Now including additional interest
expense incurred during the current quarter, driven by rising interest rates as well as interest expense from additional debt associated
with the 11 80 Peachtree acquisition. Piedmont still achieved our operational and financial goals for the quarter. With successful leasing
year-to-date, rising rental rates and asset recycling, the company was able to maintain core FFO of $0.50 per diluted share, consistent
with the third quarter of 2021. We -- the FFO generated during the third quarter was approximately $43 million, which is well above our
current $26 million quarterly dividend level.
We continue to experience improving lease economics and rental rate roll-ups during the quarter, similar to the last several quarters. Our
same-store cash NOI, however, decreased marginally as expected during the third quarter due to successful prior leasing activity and the
commencement of these leases, resulting in a 60% increase in leased square footage under abatement as of September 30, 2022
compared to September 30, 2021. The -- our guidance for same-store NOI on a cash and accrual basis remains the same for the year and
is still anticipated to increase approximately 2% and 3% as several abatements burn off during the fourth quarter.
Turning to the balance sheet. Our debt to gross asset ratio was 39.8%. This temporarily elevated ratio is due to the debt related to the
acquisition of 1180 Street that Chris mentioned. And I say temporarily elevated because as with all of our acquisitions, we intend the
recycling of assets to be leverage neutral, and we anticipate reducing our current floating debt outstanding with the proceeds from
property sales over the next few quarters, including our 2 Cambridge assets, which are currently expected to close around the end of the
year.
We also anticipate selling other noncore and nonstrategic properties during 2023, which will ultimately allow us to return to a more
normalized leverage level in the mid-30% range with no development projects outstanding. As is often the case, we acquired the 1180
Peachtree property in a reverse 1031 exchange in order to protect the significant tax gain we anticipate recognizing in conjunction with
the sale of our 2 Cambridge assets. During the third quarter, our average net debt to core EBITDA ratio was 5.9x on a trailing 12-month
basis. In addition to assuming the $197 million mortgage in conjunction with the 1180 Peachtree acquisition, -- during the third quarter,
we also entered into a $200 million bridge loan priced at SOFR plus 1%, which covered the majority of initial cash funding requirements
for the 1180 Peach Street acquisition. Additionally, I would note that Eddie and his financial planning team continually run capital
financing models.
In that regard, debt maturing through the end of next year includes a $350 million bond maturity in June of 2023, and the $200 million
term loan maturing during the third quarter. Now a majority of the term loan will be paid down with disposition proceeds that we have
previously discussed and the $350 million bond will be paid off with either a 5- to 10-year new bond issuance or more likely with a bank
term loan, which we've already begun having discussions about with our lenders. I will note that Piedmont has only one mortgage
outstanding. Therefore, the option of an additional mortgage debt is also available to us. Finally, after considering year-to-date results
and our updated 2022 annual leasing forecast, including higher interest expense resulting from the rising interest rates. We are
narrowing our 2022 annual core FFO guidance per share to between $1.99 to $2.01 per diluted share. This revised guidance is almost
exclusively attributable to increased interest expense. This concludes my prepared comments, so I'll turn it back over to Brent at this
time.
 
Christopher Brent Smith
Piedmont Office Realty Trust, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Thank you, George, Chris and Bobby. As George mentioned, Piedmont operates a portfolio of Class A assets predominantly in the
Sunbelt, we are continued population migration and job formation trends provide a mitigant to the remote work headwinds that the
office sector faces. We have refined our portfolio over the last several years to create differentiated buildings that offer premier amenity
and hospitality-driven collaboration spaces in conjunction with local food and beverage operators. But at Piedmont, we go beyond the
building to provide unique services and offerings, including our tenant engagement platform, published sustainability initiatives and
concierge experiences. It's a dynamic workplace environment that our competitors and frankly, the employees house can't easily
replicate.
The flight to quality is helping our customers to attract, retain and increase their employees' overall productivity. In fact, over the last 2
years, 70% of our executed leases have taken place at properties that we have redeveloped within the last 5 years. These asset-level
investments are what's garnering more than our fair share of leasing activity. Our balance sheet is slightly elevated in terms of leverage
due to a key strategic acquisition, but we will address the majority of the floating rate debt related to this acquisition with our anticipated
Cambridge disposition. We will focus on a few other dispositions into 2023, patiently managing our balance sheet, but committed to get
our leverage ratio down a few percent.
Finally, I would note that we recently published our annual ESG report, and it is available on our website. I would encourage you to
please take a look when you have a moment, as there is a lot of good information, and we're proud of the work we're doing in these
areas, reducing GHG emissions, energy and water consumption and curtailing waste production. We are again an Energy Star Partner of
the Year, a 2022 green lease leader with 50% of the portfolio now LEED certified, 100% of our portfolio well health-rated and 88%
BOMA certified. At Piedmont, I'm fortunate to work alongside colleagues who are good caretakers of the planet and good citizens within
our communities.
Along those lines, as I conclude, I want to thank each of my Piedmont colleagues with whom I've had the privilege to work alongside
each day for their impeccable work ethic, creative tenant offerings and the drive to provide best-in-class service to our customers. With
that, I will now ask our conference call operator to provide our listeners with instructions on how they can submit their questions. We will
attempt to answer all of your questions now or we'll make appropriate later public disclosure if necessary. Operator?
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) Your first question for today is coming from Dave Rogers.
 
Nicholas Patrick Thillman
Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division - Research Associate
Baird. It's Nick on for Dave. I just wanted to touch on the leasing pipeline. I think George went over in great detail kind of some of the key
factors you're looking at. But as we're looking at the 150,000 square feet signed in fourth quarter and the 300,000 square feet in
documentation, I guess, I want a little more color on what's that new versus renewal? And then what's like the average deal size you're
seeing?
 
George M. Wells
Piedmont Office Realty Trust, Inc. - Executive VP & COO
Sure, Nick. Great question. I'm delighted to talk about our pipeline because it continues to be pretty robust. I would say that in terms of
how much we have in new activity bucket, I would say about 1/3 of that that's already been signed is new. I would say looking forward to
what's in the documentation stage. I would say, again, it's about 1/3 or so is in the new bucket list. I think we have a couple of other
transactions that we're chasing that we hold convert into the legal space pretty soon as well.
In terms of average size, it's been a small bit of market, for the most part, I would say the last quarter, I think 24 of our 25 deals were
under 10,000 square feet. I would say, looking at what we're doing so far for November to October and November, we have a couple of
full floor transactions that were completed, which is pretty typical for us. I think we see between 1 and 3 deals that are about a full floor or
larger. But after that, I'd say the range is a little under 12,000 square feet across the board.
 
Christopher Brent Smith
Piedmont Office Realty Trust, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
I'd add there too, George. This is Brent, Nick. Thanks for joining this morning. we kind of -- as George alluded to, we really have seen that
smaller tenant, call it, half of floor 12,000 to 15,000 square feet or less, really be the strongest part of the market. And frankly, we're
probably in terms of number of deals and volume for that segment above where we were pretty pandemic. I think that's what gives us
some positive just, I guess vibes, as we think about the expirations for the remainder of this year and into next year, given the fact that we
have ex the Cargill expiration, the average tenant side that will be expiring is about 8,000 square feet. And so we really -- most of that,
got up 60%, 65% of that in the Sunbelt markets. So we really feel like the portfolio is positioned to continue to get good leasing traction
and good pipeline volume.
 
Nicholas Patrick Thillman
Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division - Research Associate
Yes. All very helpful. And then maybe touching on you guys resolved Ryan kind of for the intermediate term. looking at your larger tenant
roster, what are the chances we kind of see similar activity per se, like an Amazon looking forward at Galleria Towers just looking at like
for potential holdovers or if you've even begun discussions on something as far away as 2024.
 
Christopher Brent Smith
Piedmont Office Realty Trust, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Nick, this is Brent again. I think we were really pleased to renew Ryan, as we noted, about kind of a phased period over time with a
weighted average term of a little bit about 3.5 years now. And really, I think, an example of the success we've had at that LEED-certified
building as we look to Amazon, I think it's pretty early, given that's in 25 expiration. I will say that they are active in the space, it can do
our other Dallas tenants. But at this point, I think it's a little early to think and know whether or not their longer-term plans are. I think as
we look towards other larger tenant roll, we do have Carnival towards the end of '23, as I've noted on the last earnings call, we continue
to be engaged with them.
That LEED gold building is a phenomenal asset. It's a 2010 vintage. And if you recall, we bought it for about $185 a foot at a 10 cap. So
what's really interesting there is, and I think what continues to attract Cargill and other tenants that we do have looking into the building
or potential tenants as it is in the market now. You've got a 300-seat auditorium, a 13,000 square foot fitness center with lockers, cafe
coffee shops, it's really got everything we think about in terms of amenities that (inaudible) is the complex, and it is a building part of a
larger complex. Great parking ratio, 5 per 1,000. It is right down the street from the new light rail stop that's being built as we speak,
operational sometime, we think, in '24 is what the city is saying.
So great position asset. We're hopeful they will stay. But again, we are marketing that space. And so we'll provide continued update as
we think about Cargill as they get closer to their exploration, which again is at the end of '23. I would say as well, U.S. Bank, we continue
to stay very engaged with them also in Minneapolis in both their location downtown as well as the extension we in the space that we did
last quarter for their suburban locations. As you may recall, they -- as we noted, are working through a sizable merger with West Coast
bank that has federal approval now and hopefully, should close by the end of the year.
And as we continue to work through with them, that has come into the picture as well as their final approach to hybrid and work strategy.
I think the good news there is we see most financial services doing a predominantly in-office hybrid model. So I think overall, that bodes
well, but obviously still very close with the U.S. bank, given our relationship both on the banking side and on the customer relationship
side is a tenant.
 
Nicholas Patrick Thillman
Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division - Research Associate
Brent. Very helpful. Maybe last one for me, maybe for Chris, kind of touching on the asset sales. It sounds like the Cambridge assets are
going to trade relatively soon. Just kind of wondering on pricing, how it's changed relative to your underwriting when you were looking at
selling those assets? And then maybe touch on kind of the bidder pool out there. It sounds like all cash deal, maybe debt financing is a
little tough out there. So how is that bode for like other assets so that you have in the market right now.
(technical difficulty)
 
Operator
Ladies and gentlemen, please remain on the line while we connect the speaker line. Dave, if you can please repeat your question.
 
Nicholas Patrick Thillman
Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Research Division - Research Associate
Just last question was kind of for Chris, on the asset sales and kind of Cambridge. It sounds like that one is going to close relatively soon.
Just wanted to touch on where that's coming in relative to your underwriting for a potential sale? And then as we're looking at potential
other sales such as Houston is one of the pressure points here financing and that's part of the reason we see Cambridge trade is just
there's all cash buyers or a little more color on that would be helpful.
 
Christopher A. Kollme
Piedmont Office Realty Trust, Inc. - EVP of Investments & Strategy
Yes. Nick, good question. Sorry, again, for the technological challenges. I got to be a little guarded with our commentary on Cambridge.
We like where we sit. But in this market, we're not done until the wire hits -- we did run a fully marketed process. Demand there was not
surprisingly very robust. These are generational assets. I think we had over 80 confidentiality agreements signed in the first couple of
weeks. We launched it back in July shortly after we went non-refundable on $11.80. We threw a very wide net. We wanted as many
eyeballs as we could get on these 2 assets.
We certainly approached domestic investors, international investors as well as a couple of dozen ultra-high net worth individuals who
have ties to Harvard and/or have been investors in Cambridge for years. The debt markets, as you mentioned, and the economic
uncertainties certainly did have some impact on some potential buyers. But the uniqueness of Harvard Square and the uniqueness of
Cambridge as well as remember, these are 2 long-term leased assets to Harvard and Bank of America, there certainly was ample
demand that was engaged on the assets.
We have 2 highly qualified all-cash buyers to others with certainly others that are waiting in the wings, and we expect to close later in the
quarter. So on Cambridge, we like where we sit. Again, we're not done yet, but we've been pleased with the execution so far. On Houston,
we mentioned back in the summer that we had talked to some potential buyers on those 2 assets. I would like to remind everybody, those
are -- it's only 2 assets and a 600,000 square feet. Those conversations are still ongoing, but it's really difficult to predict when or if those
assets are going to trade, but we'll certainly keep you informed as and if we make progress there.
 
Christopher Brent Smith
Piedmont Office Realty Trust, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Nick, it's Brent. Yes, I would add. I think overall, clearly, the market is repricing risk, so the lower the rite less the price impact. And
obviously, our Cambridge assets, Chris mentioned, generational. So I think we've been fortunate to probably see less of an impact there.
As it regards to Houston, I think as you noted in your question, and I think that's pretty accurate. -- great assets.
And frankly, we've had discussions with potential buyers, valuations have been what we felt would be reasonable, but the financing
markets have not been there, and that's been probably the bigger hang-up. As we continue to talk to those groups that are interested, I
think we're hopeful that the market will open back up, but we're also beating creatively as ways to monetize and be out of Houston
longer term.
 
Operator
Your next question for today is coming from Daniel Ismail. Please announce your affiliation, then pose your question.
 
Daniel Ismail
Green Street Advisors, LLC, Research Division - Senior Analyst of Office
With Green Street. Just curious on conversations with tenants renewing their space. Has there been any conversations around changing
lease terms on a renewal or a new lease with respect to early termination rights. Have you seen tenants taking less space when they
renew or taking up more space? I'm just curious if you speak to any of those trends.
 
George M. Wells
Piedmont Office Realty Trust, Inc. - Executive VP & COO
Thank you, Dan. This is George Wells here. We've taken a look back at renewal and retention rates that we've had over the past couple of
years, and they've held pretty steady, I would say, in that 70%-plus range. And we also dug further into how many of those were looking
for contractions versus expansions that we're pleasantly surprised to note that 40 of our deals were -- had some expansion element to
them versus 27 of those deals had contractions. And that's still what we're seeing today in terms of where the dynamics of our tenants
are going. Some want more space and somewhat less. In fact, this past quarter, I think we had 6 expansions versus 3 contractions for
15,000 square feet net positive.
So yes, it still seems to be evolving. I don't think that all the macro noise that you're hearing is fully being reflected in our pipeline. We
don't want to be naïve to think that it want. But at this point, our properties continue to resonate with the demand that's in the
marketplace. I will say that flexibility is always a key for tenants that are looking at -- to enter any building in the marketplace today. And
I would say the biggest ask in that realm is basically termination right, somewhere, I would say, 2/3 of the way into a lease term. But I
would not say that, that's universal. I think on the case, that's something that's asked for, but we're not seeing a lot of contraction options
or contractions in our existing pipeline today.
 
Christopher Brent Smith
Piedmont Office Realty Trust, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
I think I'd add there, Danny too as well. Usually, there's termination rights with pretty heavy penalties. So I think that's a positive. Overall,
I'd say we continue to see that small tenant market, and I mentioned before, having the most depth also be the portion of the market
where they're not giving back space. I think it's -- I've kind of continue to understand and talk to CEOs, how they're thinking about the
real estate. We've kind of come to the realization that small organizations, offices that are generally a floor or less are typically renewing
for that same amount of space or potentially expanding if the business is growing.
It has been downsized situations have been predominantly around larger corporate situations. For instance, I know a quarter or 2 ago
where ENY New York gave back basically went from 800,000 square feet to the new asset went down to 400,000 square feet. But what
we've also seen coming into of that is suburban locations pop up or their use of we work to continue to proliferate office space further out
into the suburbs. So we continue to really focus and feel like the risk is more associated with those larger-scale tenants and why we feel
good about the average tenant size rolling through '23 of being around 8,000 square feet. -- continues to give us a pretty good
anticipation of positive renewal rates and less shrinkage, if you will, of harm renewal.
 
Daniel Ismail
Green Street Advisors, LLC, Research Division - Senior Analyst of Office
Great. I appreciate the color there. And then just last one for me. Can you give us an update on to the current marks market on the
portfolio, just in-place rents versus market rents?
 
Christopher Brent Smith
Piedmont Office Realty Trust, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Absolutely, Danny, I think as we've continued to kind of reiterate for the past few quarters, that's generally in the neighborhood of 5% to
10%. Obviously, we had a stellar quarter this year with a significant -- sorry, this quarter with a significant roll up on a number of tenants.
But even if you move the largest tenant with a massive roll up, we were still above that -- that kind of that range of 5% to 10%. I think as
we also look forward to the role, I think that's representative of kind of the more near-term role that we have in the portfolio as well. So I
think that's still a fair barometer.
 
Operator
Your next question for today is coming from Anthony Paolone.
 
Anthony Paolone
JPMorgan Chase & Co, Research Division - Senior Analyst
JPMorgan. Just first question is, as it relates to like asset sales and thinking about earnings over the next year or so I think historically,
you've tried to pair dispositions with acquisitions, and you've tried to match those in a way where it's actually been accretive. But in your
commentary, it seemed like the focus has shifted a bit more towards the balance sheet and maybe reducing debt. So should we think
about maybe dispositions next year? Like do you think that will be dilutive? Or do you still intend to kind of match that up and mitigate
the earnings impact?
 
Christopher Brent Smith
Piedmont Office Realty Trust, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Yes. I appreciate you joining this morning Tony, this is Brent. -- as we continue to really as an operating business model, we continue to
be big recyclers of capital. We've sold about $400 million, 4 out of the last 6 years and despite Covid we've still managed to continue to
be able to recycle assets. With the anticipated Cambridge dispose, we'll achieve about $300 million this year in dispose. But overall, I
think we feel like the asset sales market is going to give us the opportunity to sell Cambridge, which would be accretive relative to 1180
and then have the additional dispositions that will come in.
So that net-net, when we sell everything, we'll get back to leverage neutral and roughly earnings neutral on 1180. Again, that was a
trophy quality asset that we're trading trophy quality asset for in Cambridge. And so I think overall, the net-net quality of the portfolio
and certainly advances the strategy of continuing to bolster in high-growth submarkets like Midtown Atlanta. So we feel very positive
about the ultimate endgame and maintaining the level of earnings and not diluting earnings. As we look forward in seeing a recycling
strategy, it's always our objective to improve the quality of the portfolio and have the acquisitions to be accretive to earnings. So I would
not say anything has changed in that regard, but we'll be continuing to focus on that in '23.
 
Anthony Paolone
JPMorgan Chase & Co, Research Division - Senior Analyst
Okay. Got it. And then just one other item. Just thinking about the inflationary environment. And if the portfolio stays kind of in this
mid-80s occupied level, does inflation on the cost structure for the other 15% that you're not getting reimbursed on. Is that something we
should be thinking about as potentially notable looking into next year? Or can you kind of control that?
 
Christopher Brent Smith
Piedmont Office Realty Trust, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
I guess the first thing I'd say is the majority of our leases do you have clauses that insulate us from immediate price increases. Now then,
as you point out, the portfolio is a little bit under lease. We took on some vacancy knowingly at the really end of '19 with a number of
acquisitions that we had. And I feel like we're at the trough related to the vacancy in those acquisitions with great traction at those
assets.
So I think we feel like we can continue to maintain the occupancy level that we have in the portfolio. It is a little under lease. But overall, I
don't feel like the inflationary pressures that we're seeing are going to come to the bottom line materially to the landlord. We are a kind
of, I would say, above the occupancy level where most of the costs are being passed through to the tenants. And I don't think that's a
meaningful exposure to be shareholders to be focused on.
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) there are no further questions in queue. I would like to turn the floor over to Brent Smith for any closing
comments.
 
Christopher Brent Smith
Piedmont Office Realty Trust, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Thank you. And again, I want to thank everyone for joining the management team this morning. As a reminder, we are going to be at the
NAREIT conference in San Francisco in 2 weeks. So reach out to Justin or Eddie, if you'd like to sit down with management. We certainly
like an opportunity to tell the story and continue to share what we think is a very exciting transition that Piedmont as we continue to have
strong leasing activity and recycling transactions. Again, I want to hope everyone has a wonderful holiday season, and we look forward to
continuing the dialogue on the fourth quarter call in January. Thank you.
 
Operator
Thank you, ladies and gentlemen. This does conclude today's conference call. You may disconnect your phone lines at this time, and have
a wonderful day. Thank you for your participation.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
©2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.