CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
David L. Finkelstein
Annaly Capital Management, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
 
Ilker Ertas
Annaly Capital Management, Inc. - CIO
 
Ken Adler
Annaly Capital Management, Inc. - Head of Agency
 
Sean Kensil
Annaly Capital Management, Inc. - VP of Annaly Capital Management
 
Serena Wolfe
Annaly Capital Management, Inc. - CFO
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
Bose Thomas George
Keefe, Bruyette, & Woods, Inc., Research Division - MD
 
Douglas Michael Harter
Crédit Suisse AG, Research Division - Director
 
Richard Barry Shane
JPMorgan Chase & Co, Research Division - Senior Equity Analyst
 
Trevor John Cranston
JMP Securities LLC, Research Division - MD & Equity Research Analyst
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Good morning and welcome to the Annaly Capital Management Third Quarter 2022 Earnings Conference Call. (Operator Instructions)
Please note, this event is being recorded.
I would now like to turn the conference over to Sean Kensil, Director of Investor Relations. Please go ahead.
 
Sean Kensil
Annaly Capital Management, Inc. - VP of Annaly Capital Management
Good morning and welcome to the third quarter 2022 earnings call for Annaly Capital Management.
Any forward-looking statements made during today's call are subject to certain risks and uncertainties, including with respect to
COVID-19 impacts, which are outlined in the Risk Factors section in our most recent annual and quarterly SEC filings. Actual events and
results may differ materially from these forward-looking statements. We encourage you to read the disclaimer in our earnings release in
addition to our quarterly and annual filings.
Additionally, the content of this conference call may contain time-sensitive information that is accurate only as of the date hereof. We do
not undertake and specifically disclaim any obligation to update or revise this information.
During this call, we may present both GAAP and non-GAAP financial measures. A reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP measures is
included in our earnings release.
As a reminder, Annaly routinely posts important information for investors on the company's website, www.annaly.com. Content
referenced in today's call can be found in our third quarter 2022 investor presentation and third quarter 2022 financial supplement, both
found under the Presentations section of our website. Annaly intends to use our web page as a means of disclosing material nonpublic
information, for complying with the company's disclosure obligations under Regulation FD and to post and update investor
presentations and similar materials on a regular basis. Please also note this event is being recorded.
Participants on this morning's call include David Finkelstein, President and Chief Executive Officer; Serena Wolfe, Chief Financial Officer;
Ilker Ertas, Chief Investment Officer; Ken Adler, Head of Mortgage Servicing Rights; and Mike Fania, Head of Residential Credit.
And with that, I'll turn the call over to David.
 
David L. Finkelstein
Annaly Capital Management, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Thank you, Sean. Good morning and thank you all for joining us on our third quarter earnings call. Today, I'll provide an update on the
macroeconomic landscape, our financial results this quarter and our positioning heading into year-end. Ilker and Serena will then discuss
our portfolio activity and financial performance.
Now beginning with the macro backdrop in what continues to be a historically challenging year, the third quarter brought about a further
sell-off in the bond market, and mortgage spreads widened to crisis era levels. Persistently high inflation readings, rapid and sustained
Federal Reserve rate hikes, tightening financial conditions, elevated volatility, geopolitical turmoil and rising financial stability risks have
weighed heavily on markets.
Now to put this in historical perspective, the total return for the Bloomberg US Aggregate Bond Market Index was negative 14.6% in the
first 3 quarters of 2022, far worse than the negative 2.9% in 1994, the previous worst year in the history of the index. In light of the
continuation of this difficult environment, Annaly experienced a negative economic return of 11.7% for the quarter.
The Federal Reserve has signaled that it is determined to continue tightening monetary policy until inflation approaches its target, a
commitment that has been echoed by virtually all Fed speakers since Chair Powell's Jackson Hole speech at the end of August. This has
caused a meaningful repricing of the rate path, with markets currently expecting the hiking cycle to end at a Fed funds rate of nearly 5%
compared to expectations of just 3.5% at the end of June. This led to a sharp selloff in interest rates and exceptionally high levels of
volatility.
A consequence of volatility has been extremely weak investor demand for fixed income products, particularly for Agency MBS. In fact, the
third quarter represents only the third time in the past 10 years in which banks and mutual funds to critical private sector holders of
mortgage securities and loans have reduced their Agency MBS holdings simultaneously.
In light of the sharp selloff in rates and widening in MBS spreads, the Freddie Mac primary mortgage rate rose to 6.94% as of last
Thursday, more than doubling in 2022 and contributing to the abrupt slowdown in housing market activity.
Home price appreciation very likely peaked for the cycle and has begun to reverse course in many parts of the country. Given the
mortgage affordability shock from high home prices and rapidly rising rates, we now expect the housing market to correct, potentially
erasing the entire appreciation seen this year by early to mid-2023.
Now although prices could fall meaningfully from their recent highs, homeowners have built up substantial equity cushions. Lending
standards have been conservative. And given low rates on existing mortgages, homeowners are unlikely to default unless labor markets
weakened considerably from here.
And despite volatility in interest rate and mortgage markets, funding conditions continue to be healthy as Agency MBS repo, Residential
Credit and MSR facilities remain readily available. Our financing rates have risen certainly but are commensurate with other benchmark
short-term interest rates. And while high volatility could drive an increase in repo haircuts, we have seen limited evidence of this thus far.
The favorable financing conditions are driven by the high balances of investor cash and short-term interest rate products, best seen by
the elevated bank reserve balances and reverse repo participation at the Federal Reserve. And notwithstanding Fed portfolio runoff
reaching its steady-state run rate of up to $95 billion per month, financing conditions should maintain support as cash remains ample.
Now shifting to our portfolio. Our focus is on prudently managing our liquidity, leverage and risk profile in the current environment. We
continue to position ourselves defensively given sustained volatility and have strong liquidity with more than $6 billion in unencumbered
assets, including $4.3 billion in cash and Agency MBS, which represents over 50% of our common equity as of quarter end.
During the quarter, we maintained our economic leverage at 6.5 turns until mid-September when the sharp market selloff over the last 2
weeks of the quarter brought our leverage up roughly half a turn to end the quarter at 7.1 turns. While we're comfortable with our current
portfolio positioning, we expect our leverage to trend modestly lower over the longer term, reflective of our target capital allocation.
With respect to portfolio mix, we modestly grew each of the 3 strategies with our total assets increasing to $86.2 billion as we selectively
deployed capital from common equity issuance on the quarter. While the majority of new capital was committed to Agency, our capital
allocation in the sector decreased 4 percentage points to 67% as the Agency portfolio absorbed the vast majority of the increase in
leverage to end the quarter.
Turning to Residential Credit. In light of deteriorating housing market fundamentals, portfolio growth was focused on opportunistic
additions of securities that are less susceptible to home price declines. Though we believe our whole loan portfolio is well positioned to
withstand further weakness in the housing sector, we have tightened our already stringent credit standards, and we expect this pace of
securitizations to moderate in the near term. Nevertheless, we remain the largest nonbank issuer of prime jumbo and expanded credit
MBS this quarter. This has largely been a result of our whole loan correspondent channel, which recently achieved over $2 billion in
aggregated loans since inception in April 2021.
Now with respect to our mortgage servicing rights business, we have now fully scaled our platform, having more than tripled our
portfolio size year-over-year. The MSR portfolio benefits from stable cash flows in the low prepayment environment and helps to hedge
the risks of a further slowdown in housing activity. Although we were the second largest purchaser of MSR in 2022 as of the end of the
quarter, we expect to be measured with respect to future growth considering the sector's relative attractiveness in our risk parameters.
Now, overall, we anticipate market challenges will persist over the near term and we'll maintain our defensive posture until volatility
subsides. While spreads across our investment strategies are historically attractive, again, we're focused on preserving liquidity and
optionality against additional market turbulence. And when the outlook improves, we're well positioned to take advantage of
opportunities across our 3 businesses.
Now, lastly, before handing it off to Ilker, I wanted to take a moment to provide some perspective on where we sit today. We understand
that 2022 has been an immensely challenging period in financial markets. We recently marked 25 years as a public company, and I was
reminded of Annaly's resilience throughout numerous volatile market events such as long-term capital in 1998, the 2008 financial crisis,
the taper tantrum and, most recently, the financial market dislocation at the onset of COVID. Annaly has proven our ability to
successfully navigate through these episodes and market turbulence, and we are confident that our business model will emerge from
this current period stronger than ever.
Now with that, Ilker will provide a more detailed overview of our portfolio activity for the quarter and outlook for each business.
 
Ilker Ertas
Annaly Capital Management, Inc. - CIO
Thank you, David. As you discussed, after a brief respite in the first half of the quarter, interest rate volatility resumed its march higher,
risk sentiment turned negative, and Agency MBS sharply underperformed interest rate hedges, with spreads widening 25 to 30 basis
points. Meanwhile, non-Agency spreads also saw considerable volatility throughout the quarter but ended Q3 roughly unchanged, and
MSR valuations remained relatively stable.
Starting with Agency portfolio activity. Our holdings grew by roughly $3 billion in market value as we patiently deployed the equity raise
during the quarter, purchasing meaningfully fewer assets than implied by constant leverage on new capital. We continued to rotate the
portfolio up in coupon, significantly reducing our holdings of 3s and below while adding to our positions in 4.5s and 5s, which benefit
from lower sensitivity to spread movements and better carrier.
Our purchases were predominantly in pools, and we reduced our TBA holdings by $3.5 billion. During the quarter, specified pools
outperformed TBA as investors gravitated toward a better combination of specified collateral given the elevated volatility. Additionally,
with TBA rose softening, pools provide incremental (inaudible) across nearly all coupons.
Lastly, with the mortgage universe firmly out of the money from a refi perspective, seasoned cash flows are in strong demand. The
embedded HPA should provide extension protection, benefiting our portfolio which is, on average, over 3-year season.
In terms of prepays, our portfolio paid 9.8% CPR in Q3, a slowdown from 14.9% CPR in the prior quarter, primarily driven by higher rates.
We expect a slow prepaid environment to persist over the near term as seasonal turnover declines and cash-out refinances diminish due
to elevated rates and declining HPAs.
In our hedge portfolio, we maintained a defensive posture consistent with prior quarters. We added over $5.5 billion notional of primarily
longer-dated swaps to match the expansion of our assets as rates continue to rise. Additionally, we added over $7 billion in treasury
futures hedges at the front end of the curve to maintain protection as our short-term maturity swaps rolled down.
Turning to our Residential Credit business. The economic market value of the resi portfolio ended Q3 at $5.1 billion, a modest increase
over Q2. As David briefly touched on, portfolio growth was largely driven by the increase in our NPL/RPL structured securities positions,
an area of the market that has very high credit enhancement and is collateralized by loans from seasoned borrowers with significant
equity who are less exposed to negative HPAs.
In residential whole loans, we settled $900 million of expanded credit loans in Q3 and sponsored 3 securitizations, generating $120
million market value of retained OBX bonds. We expect future whole loan purchases to moderate given increasing borrower rates and
seasonal factors, which will likely reduce housing market transactions.
With respect to our MSR business, we continue to grow our MSR holdings with the purchase of one bulk package representing roughly
$150 million in market value. In light of the fragility of the housing market, it's important to note that our portfolio consists of very high
credit quality, 760 FICO, 68% LTV, sub-3% coupon collateral, which has benefited from steady rising interest rates this year. Our MSR
portfolio paid 4.3 CPR in the third quarter, providing very attractive and stable cash flows while serving as a hedge to slow turnover
speeds in the deep discount MBS universe. Year-to-date, through the third quarter, we have grown our MSR portfolio by over $1.2 billion
in market value to nearly $1.9 billion.
As the market stands today, spreads across our investable asset classes look very attractive from a historical perspective. However, to
reiterate David's point, our focus in this period of elevated uncertainty will be to preserve liquidity. In MSR market, we anticipate that
originators will continue to monetize MSR given pressure on margins and cash requirements. We will be patient to further grow our
portfolio given expectations for ongoing supply while cognizant that MSR have been more resilient to the cheapening experience in other
sectors.
In Residential Credit, we will be patient about adding further exposure given the decelerating housing market. In Agency MBS, the
widening experience year-to-date has been particularly acute. Nominal spreads on production coupon mortgages are in excess of 150
basis points and auction adjusted spreads are over 50 basis points. As mentioned, these are levels not seen since prior crisis episodes
such as COVID and the 2008 financial crisis.
However, the differences with those periods versus today are: first, repo financing remains widely available; second, comparable assets
such as corporate credit are meaningfully tighter; and third, the backdrop for Agency MBS is more attractive. With mortgage universe
way below par, asset convexity is much better. And with higher rates slowing housing activity, supply should contract materially.
Lastly, the possibility of a broader economic slowdown has increased, and Agency MBS has historically outperformed comparable fixed
income products during recessionary periods.
Our outlook is optimistic for each of our 3 businesses over the medium term, but we will remain patient to grow the portfolio until we see
evidence of volatility subsiding.
With that, I will hand it over to Serena to discuss the financials.
 
Serena Wolfe
Annaly Capital Management, Inc. - CFO
Thank you, Ilker. Today, I will provide brief financial highlights for the quarter ended September 30, 2022, and discuss select
quarter-to-date metrics.
Consistent with prior quarters, while our earnings release discloses GAAP and non-GAAP earnings metrics, my comments will focus on
our non-GAAP EAD and related key performance metrics, which exclude PAA. Additionally, our per share metrics are adjusted for our
1-for-4 reverse stock split effective in September 2022.
Our book value per share was $19.94 for Q3, which decreased by $3.65 per share for the quarter, primarily due to higher rates, spread
widening and the continued declining valuations on our Agency portfolio, along with lower credit valuations, albeit more modest
declines in comparison to the Agency book.
Our swap in futures positions supported book value, providing a partial offset to the Agency declines mentioned above, contributing
$6.93 per share to the book value during the quarter, and our MSR position added $0.09.
As noted in our Q2 earnings call, while our futures book does not offset higher repo rates in EAD, the derivatives are fully reflected in
economic returns. And in Q3, they serve their function, with futures alone having contributed 60% of the hedge benefit to our book value.
After combining our book value performance with our third quarter dividend of $0.88, our quarterly economic return was negative 11.7%.
We generated earnings available for distribution of $1.06 per share. EAD continued to outpace our dividend, though we experienced the
beginning of the moderation in EAD that we have discussed on our recent earnings calls, with EAD per share reduced by $0.16 compared
to last quarter. The lower EAD for the quarter is primarily related to the continued rise in repo rates, causing repo expense to more than
triple during the quarter as well as lower expected TBA dollar roll income, which declined by approximately $0.17. EAD did benefit from
our improved swap net interest benefit on higher received rates of $0.33 per share, reduced premium amortization ex PAA on lower CPRs
of $0.13 and continued growth in MSR-related income, increasing by $0.06 per share compared to Q2.
Given the challenges David and Ilker referenced in the current environment and the impact on EAD of the composition of our hedging
portfolio noted above, all things equal, we currently expect Q4 earnings to be roughly in line with the third quarter dividend.
Average yields ex PAA were 37 basis points higher than the prior quarter at 3.24% due to lower CPRs and a meaningful decline in
amortization. Additionally, the portfolio generated 198 basis points of NIM ex PAA, down 22 basis points from Q2 driven by the reduced
TBA dollar roll income and higher repo rates. Net interest spread does not include dollar roll income. Therefore, the decrease was more
muted, down 6 basis points at 1.70% compared to Q2.
Now turning to our financing. David provided color on our views of the robustness of the funding markets. However, we continue to see
uncertainty about the pace of future rate hikes, with multiple liquidity within the repo market continuing to trade to Fed dates or shorter.
Because of this uncertainty, bilateral repo markets continue to price term markets more cautiously, resulting in wider term premiums.
Access to term markets remain intact. However, we do not expect a meaningful shift in our positioning until we feel the Fed has reached
the end of its hiking cycle. As a result, as we messaged in prior quarters, we continue to maintain a shorter dated book over the near term
versus prior years. The quarter-over-quarter, weighted average repo maturity was up 10 days compared to Q2 at 57 days.
Turning to our Residential Credit financing strategy. Our discipline in accessing the securitization market throughout the year has kept
our net exposure to our unsecuritized whole loan book appropriately sized, with only $805 million on the balance sheet to end the
quarter. 92% of our gas consolidated whole loan portfolio is term-funded through our residential securitization, with a weighted average
financing rate of 3.05%, approximately 450 basis points below the current non-QM cost of funds.
As the securitization market slowed in October and the cost of funds to access the securitization market has steadily risen, we remain
well positioned with significant warehouse capacity, approximately $1.4 billion, across multiple partners with staggered renewal dates.
Given our favorable positioning, we will continue to monitor the securitization market and are prepared to be opportunistic.
Shifting to MSR financing. We drew on our MSR warehouse facility during the quarter for $250 million, and after quarter end, executed
the accordion for a total facility of $500 million. To reiterate our message from last quarter, we put this facility in place primarily for
liquidity purposes and expect to maintain lower leverage on this business.
Overall, the upward trend in interest rates impacted our total cost of funds for the quarter, rising by 44 basis points to 154 basis points in
Q3. Meanwhile, our average repo rate for the quarter was 225 basis points compared to 81 basis points in the prior quarter. Our activity in
the securitization market also impacted funding costs, increasing the weighting of securitizations on the composition of cost of funds,
along with higher effective rates previously referenced above of 3.05% compared to 2.73%, resulting in an increase of 5 basis points to
cost of funds.
Finally, swaps positively impacted cost of funds during the quarter, as previously mentioned, by 85 basis points, more than twice the
benefit in comparison to Q2.
Lastly, as David mentioned earlier, Annaly maintained an abundant liquidity profile with $6.1 billion of unencumbered assets, down
modestly from the prior quarter at $6.3 billion. Much of the reduction in unencumbered assets was due to the pledging of a portion of our
MSR to the previously mentioned warehouse facility and higher leverage levels on Agency MBS.
With that, we will turn it over to questions, operator.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) And our first question will come from Bose George of KBW.
 
Bose Thomas George
Keefe, Bruyette, & Woods, Inc., Research Division - MD
Can I start just asking about mark-to-market book value so far this quarter?
 
David L. Finkelstein
Annaly Capital Management, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Sure, Bose. So obviously, the turbulence continued into October, notwithstanding the fact that we did pick up a few percentage points
this week. But nonetheless, as of last night, book was off 6% to 7% at roughly 18.60%.
 
Bose Thomas George
Keefe, Bruyette, & Woods, Inc., Research Division - MD
Okay. Great. And then your current dividend implies a net ROE of around, I guess, 17.5-ish. And is that an attainable economic return on
your portfolio?
And then just in your comments, you noted that EAD next quarter will be more in line with the dividend. But when you think about the
dividend, should we really be focusing more on the economic return versus the EAD just given your treasury futures?
 
David L. Finkelstein
Annaly Capital Management, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Sure, Bose. And to your point, we discussed this with you last quarter, actually. Economic return or economic earnings is how we think
about it. And just to review Serena's comments, as she mentioned, we do expect to earn the dividend this quarter. Earnings available for
distribution is moderating. And also to Serena's point, swap income is becoming an increasing portion of that EAD as short rates are
increasing. And futures do impact or benefit the economic income or economic return but don't flow through EAD. So there's some
noneconomic factors that may bring EAD down. But nonetheless, to the point of moderation, there are real economic factors that are
influencing earnings. For example, as we sit here today, leverage will likely be lower. Financing costs are going up, and some swaps are
rolling off. So we do have to take those into consideration.
And with respect to the actual earnings yield, as you mentioned, we're right around 18% on quarter end book. It's above the peer set as it
has been really since the onset of COVID, and it's above where we've been historically. And we'll obviously take a look at that as the
market evolves and make a determination as to what the appropriate yield should be. And as we've said consistently, we expect to
maintain a competitive yield with the peer set but also sustainable and in line with our historical average payout ratio.
So to give you a summary, we feel good about Q4. We'll see how rates evolve over the next number of months and always look at the
dividend in conjunction with our Board and come up with the appropriate payout ratio.
 
Operator
The next question comes from Doug Harter of Credit Suisse.
 
Douglas Michael Harter
Crédit Suisse AG, Research Division - Director
Can you talk about how you're thinking about leverage, balancing kind of near-term volatility versus kind of the wide level of spreads and
kind of what you might be looking for in order to either take up or take down leverage from here?
 
David L. Finkelstein
Annaly Capital Management, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Sure. So we did take down leverage somewhat modestly as we started the quarter. Where we sit today is around 6.75 turns, and we feel
good about it. Agency MBS as well as other sectors we invest in is historically cheap, but also volatility is historically high. And the
technical factors associated with Agency specifically in terms of Fed runoff and where flows are coming from have also been somewhat
negative.
So what we're looking for in terms of how we're managing the portfolio is a decline in volatility and money to flow into fixed income, and
particularly Agency MBS. So we're comfortable with the current leverage level currently. It is elevated to where we've been. But at the
end of the day, assets are cheap, and we do expect there to be a decline in volatility. And with spreads at historically wide levels, we're
certainly comfortable with where we're at now.
 
Douglas Michael Harter
Crédit Suisse AG, Research Division - Director
I guess in that construct, with -- knowing that there is volatility, I mean, why not kind of lean into that, let leverage kind of creep higher
and sort of take a longer-term view and absorb near-term volatility?
 
David L. Finkelstein
Annaly Capital Management, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
So let's talk about the last 6 weeks and what we've gone through with the market and just to frame out how we're thinking about things.
And candidly, Doug, there has been virtually no good news over the past 6 weeks for fixed income investors, beginning with the Jackson
Hole speech in late August where -- that was probably one of the most hawkish speeches we've seen from the Fed in quite some time.
And then subsequent to that, we moved into September. We get a strong payrolls number. Then CPI ticks up from 5.9 to 6.3, again, not
good news. We go into the September Fed meeting where the dot plots exceeded what the market was pricing with the 4.375 rate at the
end of the -- at the end of 2022 projected as well as reinforcing that hawkish tone.
And then we get into late September, and we have the U.K. gilt debacle, which led to 140 basis points selloff in gilts over the course of
about 5 days, which is, for a very developed market like the U.K., is stunning and then the Ministry of Finance intervention. And then we
move into October with September payrolls showing very strong results, 3.5% unemployment rate as well as 5% year-over-year wage
gains. And then following that, September CPI at 6.6%, which is obviously -- core CPI, which is obviously quite high. And all of this
explains, I think, why we had a trough to peak selloff across U.S. yields of about 120 basis points and 35 basis points wider MBS spreads.
So we have to be respectful of all of that.
Now we're sitting here at the quarter end with $4.3 billion in cash and Agency MBS unencumbered, but we feel like we want to maintain
our liquidity until we get out of this and we get some better news. We do expect things to turn. Obviously, the economy, we've seen signs
of slowing but remains resilient with a strong labor market and underlying inflation, which we haven't seen turn yet. And so we need to
really see a turn before we would incrementally add to our portfolio. Does that help?
 
Douglas Michael Harter
Crédit Suisse AG, Research Division - Director
Very helpful.
 
Operator
Next question comes from Rick Shane of JPMorgan.
 
Richard Barry Shane
JPMorgan Chase & Co, Research Division - Senior Equity Analyst
So I'm very intrigued by the hedge mix on Page 11, and I find it particularly interesting in the context of what we've seen from mortgage
rates. And we've had this incredible event, which is that between December '21 and today, we basically reset the channel markers in
terms of mortgage rates from a low to a high. And those extremes were the lowest and highest in more than 20 years.
You've seen your hedge ratio shift -- or your hedge composition shift fairly significantly. As we approach potentially a peak in terms of
mortgage rates, how would we expect this to shift? I'm particularly concerned about the swap ratio and adding a lot of duration there in
an environment where you might actually start to see speeds pick up at some point in the future.
 
Ilker Ertas
Annaly Capital Management, Inc. - CIO
Sure. So I'm assuming you're asking, are we hedging too much? Are we, like, putting, like, too many hedges, is that -- that seems to be
my understanding.
 
Richard Barry Shane
JPMorgan Chase & Co, Research Division - Senior Equity Analyst
No. I think -- yes, but I think the real question is, from our point of view, not being as sophisticated at this as you are, how do you mitigate
that risk of being overhedged if rates do start to shift? And is that what we're seeing in terms of this mix shift on the hedge portfolio?
 
Ilker Ertas
Annaly Capital Management, Inc. - CIO
Sure. If you look at recently the performance of mortgages, you will see a correlation with the rates. And the correlation is that as rates
sell off, mortgages underperform. So we expect this short-term negative correlation to persist. This is opposite of what it used to be in
the long run. Usually at risk-off days are market's rally days. But we are in an environment, which David really described like very nicely in
the previous question that we are in a very different environment that risk-off environments are like market selloff environment. That
explains a little bit of our high realizations, but I see your point, and we have been looking into that. And the point when we realize that
correlation is turning off, we will do the appropriate actions.
But to reiterate, we do not take interest rate positions right now. We are trying to fully hedge. And we are cognizant that correlation is on
the other side of the system. Does that help?
 
Richard Barry Shane
JPMorgan Chase & Co, Research Division - Senior Equity Analyst
It does. And it's actually -- actually, it puts language around some of the things that we're seeing that struggle to -- we struggle to
explain as well in terms of risk on, risk off as well.
 
Ilker Ertas
Annaly Capital Management, Inc. - CIO
Yes. It has been like this episode has been an environment where risk-off is coming with the rate selloff. So that's why it's particularly
difficult for the financial players in the system that -- especially that you hear a lot on the financial news that 60-40 portfolio and all that
kind of stuff. All they are really trying to describe is that this correlation break the other way around, and that's why it is very difficult.
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) And the next question comes from Trevor Cranston of JMP Securities.
 
Trevor John Cranston
JMP Securities LLC, Research Division - MD & Equity Research Analyst
Question on the composition of the Agency portfolio. You guys have obviously been moving up in coupon as the current coupon has
increased substantially over the course of the year. Can you talk about sort of how much liquidity and float there is, say, like above 5%
coupons today? And kind of on incrementally with the current coupon where it is, right now, kind of what coupons you'd be sort of
looking to move into within the Agency portfolio?
 
Ilker Ertas
Annaly Capital Management, Inc. - CIO
Yes. That's a good point. The liquidity above 5%, which are like 5.5% and 6s are [already at 10] related. In fact, like, the movements are
so fast that we have been skipping coupons. Like David and I have been doing this, like, over -- like, 25 years. We have never seen like
coupons skipping like this. Production coupons skip from 2.5 to 5 like in a very, very short period of time. And now even [5 stars] [$96]
price.
There is not that much liquidity in 5.5s and above, but that's the wrong word to say. There is not that much flow in 5.5s and 6s above. So
that's why like when we say up in coupon, we usually mean 5s. And we shifted most of our lower coupon exposure into 5s, and it's like
$96 price. And especially with the concern that Rick was raising in the previous question, we really like that price point, $96 to $98 price
point. And I think where we stand right now, that will probably be most of our focus going forward.
 
David L. Finkelstein
Annaly Capital Management, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Yes. And Trevor, one more point about market liquidity. I think everybody has heard about some of the dislocations that have been
exhibited in markets. And yes, liquidity is constrained, whether it's treasuries or Agency MBS or out the spectrum. But this is largely a
function of volatility. And when volatility does subside, liquidity will certainly improve. But nonetheless, you have to be very gentle with
your approach to managing fixed income portfolios in the current environment.
 
Trevor John Cranston
JMP Securities LLC, Research Division - MD & Equity Research Analyst
Yes. Okay. That makes sense. And then one question on the MSR. Obviously, valuations continued to move higher this quarter. Can you
talk sort of theoretically for low coupon MSR, kind of where you view the cap in terms of valuation? And if there's a point somewhere soon
where the duration of it could actually become positive.
 
David L. Finkelstein
Annaly Capital Management, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Yes. I'll start, and Ken can certainly add. We are certainly in the context of that cap. If you just look at the increase in valuation on the
quarter, it's only 1/10 of a multiple, and we had roughly 100 basis point increase in rates across the curve. And the MSR CPR went down
roughly 30%. So you're starting to see that crest here. And Ken, feel free to...
 
Ken Adler
Annaly Capital Management, Inc. - Head of Agency
And your point -- I mean, look, the cash flows are fully extended. There's only so slow the pools can pay, but the certainty of them paying
slower continues as rates rise. So on an option-adjusted basis, it gets more favorable.
The other point is when you own MSR, you manage lots of cash balances. So as rates rise, you earn the service or the owner of the MSR
earns more return on those cash balances. So that negative duration, particularly in the front end of the curve, continues. So there's
always going to be that negative duration.
 
David L. Finkelstein
Annaly Capital Management, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Yes. That float effectively provides more income as short rates do rise, obviously. And another point to note in terms of the construction
of our MSR. We feel very good about what we own. We've achieved a lot of growth over the past year. And the overall MSR is 400 basis
points out of the money, and the credit is quite good.
So with respect to how housing evolves, we think that asset is going to perform very well for us.
 
Ilker Ertas
Annaly Capital Management, Inc. - CIO
And to add to both David and Ken, this discount MSR is, like, may not be hedging interest rate risk anymore, but it is still hedging the
turnover risk in the mortgage market. And turnover risk is the biggest risk after volatility subsides in the mortgage market. We like where
we stand on the discount MSR.
 
Operator
This concludes our question-and-answer session. I would like to turn the conference back over to CEO, David Finkelstein, for any closing
remarks.
 
David L. Finkelstein
Annaly Capital Management, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Thank you, Andrea, and thanks, everybody, for joining us this morning. And good luck over the next number of months, and we'll talk to
you soon.
 
Operator
The conference has now concluded. Thank you for attending today's presentation, and you may now disconnect.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
©2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.