CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
Howard M. Lorber
Douglas Elliman Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
Daniel Thomas Fannon
Jefferies LLC, Research Division - Senior Equity Research Analyst
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Welcome to Douglas Elliman, Inc.'s Third Quarter 2022 Earnings Conference Call. This call is being recorded and simultaneously
webcast. An archived version of the webcast will be available on the Investor Relations section of the company's website located at
investors.elliman.com for 1 year.
During this call, the terms adjusted net income and adjusted EBITDA will be used. These terms are non-GAAP financial measures and
should be considered in addition to, but not as a substitute for, other measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with
GAAP. Reconciliations to adjusted net income and adjusted EBITDA are contained in the company's earnings release, which has been
posted to the Investor Relations section of the company's website.
Before the call begins, I would like to read a safe harbor statement. The statements made during the conference call that are not
historical facts are forward-looking statements that are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ
materially from those set forth in or implied by forward-looking statements. These risks are described in more detail in the company's
Securities and Exchange Commission filings.
Now I would like to turn the call over to the Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer of Douglas Elliman, Inc. Howard M. Lorber.
 
Howard M. Lorber
Douglas Elliman Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Good morning, and thank you for joining us. With me today are Richard Lampen, our Chief Operating Officer; Bryant Kirkland, our Chief
Financial Officer; and Scott Durkin, President and CEO of Douglas Elliman Realty, our residential real estate brokerage business. On
today's call, we will discuss trends in residential real estate, Douglas Elliman's financial results for the 3 and 9 months ended September
30, 2022, and performance in our luxury markets. We will then provide closing comments and open the call for questions.
I would like to begin by discussing the current operating environment for residential real estate and why we believe Douglas Elliman is
well positioned despite the challenging market. As we discussed in the second quarter earnings call, beginning in June, we saw a decline
in commissions from existing home sales, and this trend continues to date. We believe this decline has been caused by a limited supply
of new inventory significant increases in mortgage interest rates and volatility in the financial markets. As our industry enters a down
cycle, Douglas Elliman is positioned to take advantage of significant opportunities due to our key strengths, which provide competitive
advantages and include our global network, our best-in-class agents and the outstanding relationship we have with them. We have
added 336 net agents in 2022. In addition to successfully recruiting agents, we are very proud of our 88% agent retention rate. Each
year, we provide opportunities to bring Elliman agents together so they may establish referral relationships that help to retain important
transactional business within Douglas Elliman.
One reason agents joined and remain on the Elliman team is our world-class development marketing business, which has a hybrid
platform that distinguishes us from our competitors. The platform combines our leading agents with an experienced team of 80
employees in development and marketing to represent the most exclusive new developments in the United States. And because our
approach encourages our agents with expertise in the luxury home retail business to market new developments, the development
marketing business often serves as a pipeline for future resale transactions for our agents.
Our second key strength is the Douglas Elliman brand. Backed by 111-year reputation, the brand represents the finest in luxury real estate
across the key markets, most of which are less sensitive to mortgage interest rates. Our key luxury markets are complementary with
similar home purchases. We continue to expand into markets with similar characteristics. Having recently expanded to Las Vegas,
Nantucket and New Canaan, Connecticut, we have also expanded in existing markets with new offices opening in Newport Beach,
California and Basalt, Colorado.
Third, our distinct approach to technology provides our regions with state-of-the-art applications designed to increase their productivity
and business. Many of these innovative applications have been identified by our New Valley Ventures PropTech investment subsidiary.
Our relationship with these cutting-edge transformative companies as an investor and client enables us to discover new innovations that
benefit our agents at a low operating cost. Our agents have embraced these enhancements and technology is a critical component in
recruiting agents from competitors.
And of course, our final key strength is our financial profile. We have a long history of profitability and current liquidity of approximately
$193 million of cash at September 30, 2022, and no debt. This power provides us with opportunities to increase our core brokerage
business as well as scale our overhead expenses by entering new markets.
I would like to address the listing inventory shortage, which continues to be a key characteristic of the housing market where we are
active. The sudden increase in borrowing costs in 2022 has restrained potential supply from entering the housing market as homeowners
remain reluctant to part with the mortgage rate obtained through purchase or refinance over the past several years. Therefore, the
unusual low listing inventory levels particularly in the luxury sector, have restrained sales potential, keeping a firm base in place for
pricing.
As a result, we have seen and are continuing to see luxury listing inventory at lower levels. We're entering the market at lower levels than
before the pandemic era began. However, we believe the tight supply will gradually ease as time passes and consumers adjust to higher
interest rates and sellers when forced to sell will adjust prices accordingly. Importantly, in residential real estate, luxury markets are
usually the last markets to enter a down cycle and the first markets to emerge when a cycle ends. So we see a tremendous opportunity
for growth in all luxury markets when market uncertainty subsides.
Now turning to Douglas Elliman's financial results for the 3 and 9 months ended September 30, 2022. Beginning with our financial
results for the 3 months ended September 30, 2022. The 3 months ended September 30, 2022, Douglas Elliman reported $272.6 million
in revenues compared to $354.2 million in the third quarter of 2021. Net loss attributed to Douglas Elliman for the 3 months ended
September 30, 2022 was $4 million or $0.05 per diluted share compared to net income of $25.2 million or $0.32 per diluted share in the
third quarter of 2021.
For the 3 months ended September 30, 2022, adjusted EBITDA attributed to Douglas Elliman was $124,000 compared to $27.8 million
in the third quarter of 2021. Douglas Elliman began operating as a stand-alone public company in 2022, following its spin-off from
Vector Group. Expenses incurred by our public company operations are reported in the corporate and other segment, and the operations
of our brokerage businesses are reported in our real estate brokerage segment. Therefore, for comparison purposes, our real estate
brokerage segment reported operating income of $1.5 million for the 3 months ended September 30, 2022, compared to $25.5 million in
the third quarter of 2021.
Adjusted EBITDA attributed to our real estate brokerage segment were $5.1 million for the 3 months ended September 30, 2022,
compared to $27.8 million in the third quarter of 2021. For the 3 months ended September 30, 2022, adjusted net loss attributed to
Douglas Elliman was $4.0 million or $0.05 per share compared to adjusted net income of $24.9 million or $0.32 per share in the third
quarter of 2021.
Moving now to Douglas Elliman's financial results for the 9 months ended September 30, 2022. For the 9 months ended September 30,
22, Douglas Elliman reported $945.8 million in revenues compared to $1 billion in the 2021 period. Net income attributed to Douglas
Elliman for the 9 months ended September 30, 2022, was $12.8 million or $0.16 per diluted share compared to net income of $78.7
million or $1.01 per diluted share in the 2021 period. For the 9 months ended September 30, 2022, adjusted EBITDA attributed to
Douglas Elliman was $32.1 million compared to $89.4 million in the 2021 period. For comparison purposes, our real estate brokerage
segment reported operating income of $37.6 million for the 9 months ended September 30, 2022, compared to $82.9 million for the
2021 period.
Adjusted EBITDA attributed to our real estate brokerage segment were $47.2 million for the 9 months ended September 30, 2022,
compared to $89.4 million for the 2021 period. For the 9 months ended September 30, 2022, adjusted net income attributed to Douglas
Selman was $12.2 million or $0.15 per share compared to $81.9 million or $1.05 per share in the 2021 period. Douglas Elliman also
maintained a strong balance sheet with cash of approximately $193 million at September 30, 2022.
In summary, Douglas Elliman has shown enduring performance in 2022 despite a challenging market, and we believe our differentiated
platform and approach position us for continued long-term growth. Our proven management team has a successful history of navigating
many economic cycles and applying financial discipline that balances the importance of maintaining revenue while also judiciously
analyzing operating expenses to create long-term stockholder value.
During the great financial crisis of 2008, our business was concentrated in the New York metropolitan area. And by 2010, revenues had
returned to 2008 levels. Further by 2010, net income increased to a then record. These examples demonstrate both the power and
tenacity of our agents on the Douglas Elliman brand name and luxury markers as well as the decades of experience this management
team has in creating opportunities that appropriately reflect the current economic environment.
Looking ahead, we are focused on creating stockholder value through strategic market expansion, continued recruitment of best-in-class
talent, operational efficiencies and further adoption of innovative solutions to empower our agents. In addition, during the third quarter,
we were pleased to pay another $0.05 per share dividend to our stockholders. It is our expectation that the dividend will serve as a key
component of our capital allocation going forward.
With that, we will be happy to answer questions. Operator?
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) Your first question comes from the line of Daniel Fannon from Jefferies.
 
Daniel Thomas Fannon
Jefferies LLC, Research Division - Senior Equity Research Analyst
I wanted to just follow up and understand specifically maybe what you are doing differently in this type of backdrop. Clearly, as you said,
the macro -- some rates to kind of inventory are all kind of working against kind of what might be a more normalized activity and revenue
environment. So as a management team and as in terms of how you're thinking about managing the business, you said -- can you kind of
give some general terms, but I was hoping you get a little more specific in terms of what you guys are actually doing differently today and
thinking about even into next year versus, say, 6 months ago?
 
Howard M. Lorber
Douglas Elliman Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
We have been going in a process to evaluate costs related to leases, such as expenses related to travel, non-agent facing, administrative
support and special events. The support and services we provide to our agents distinguishes us from our competitors. We do not intend
to reduce anything that's agent-facing. That, we want to leave a loan because that's one of the reasons we are bringing in new agents,
and agents are staying with us.
 
Daniel Thomas Fannon
Jefferies LLC, Research Division - Senior Equity Research Analyst
Okay. And so you mentioned a couple of new markets and expanding. Is that -- I guess, you mentioned Las Vegas, Nantucket, New
Canaan, are those new here in kind of third quarter? And as you think about prospectively, we should still kind of continue to think about
more markets and kind of the historical level of growth maybe that you've been putting forth in recent periods.
 
Howard M. Lorber
Douglas Elliman Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Yes. Yes, we're looking at those new markets. And basically, we're opening in markets is slightly a different way than those that just go
out and buy other companies. We generally try to find a few good brokers in those markets and bring them in with us and rent, in many
cases, temporary space or small space to get started. We do not spend a lot of money in opening or buying offices. We really never have.
We bought a company once in California. That was probably it. And then we made some very small purchases, money in the hundreds of
thousands just to get some people to come over to us. So we're really not big spenders as it relates to opening new businesses and new
markets. We're not going to just go there, hire space or buy another company and hope that it works. So we're very careful in opening
new offices. So we're going to continue if we find the right situation and the right people.
 
Daniel Thomas Fannon
Jefferies LLC, Research Division - Senior Equity Research Analyst
Understood. And as you think about the inventory challenges for the industry within the markets where you have strong market share, is
there any differences? Are some a little bit better, Florida versus New York? Or just trying to get a sense of -- I know it's kind of what
those are broad trends of higher rates and everything that's happening across the U.S. But are you just hoping to have a little more
delineation between the markets?
 
Howard M. Lorber
Douglas Elliman Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Yes. I mean, when you look at New York, New York is actually performing pretty well compared to some of the other markets. But then
again, if you look back to last year, everyone likes to compare to 2021. And 2021 was something that I don't think anyone really
understands how it would happen and what happened so quickly. And to make comparisons compared to 2021 is really, to me, doesn't
seem to make much sense because the real fact is, who said that 2021 is the base year? Yet 2014, '15, '16, '17, '18 and '19 to look at also.
And we are still, I believe, better than we were. 2019 was the last year before the pandemic. So I think we're in pretty good shape. And I
think that the luxury markets generally hold up pretty good as we're talking about it now, it's just a matter of the inventory. We still see
lots of buyers at that level, but there's very little inventory because the price has moved up a lot. People are just holding on from last
year. So -- but that's going to soften at some point.
 
Daniel Thomas Fannon
Jefferies LLC, Research Division - Senior Equity Research Analyst
Okay. And then just lastly, if you could provide an update on kind of the new development, marketing and how that would kind of --
prospects that shows today or if that's also -- I would assume also showing some signs of slowdown, but any update around that would
be helpful.
 
Howard M. Lorber
Douglas Elliman Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Yes. I mean, there is not a lot of new development in New York because nothing started during the pandemic. So we do have projects
that were left over from before and a few new projects coming up. But the most robust new development market for us in Florida, where
we have a very big schedule of new projects coming on the market over the next 18 months in the billions.
 
Daniel Thomas Fannon
Jefferies LLC, Research Division - Senior Equity Research Analyst
And just to clarify the next 18 months, is that more back half of next year that we should start seeing it come on or (inaudible)...
 
Howard M. Lorber
Douglas Elliman Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
No, they're starting now. They're starting now. We've opened a couple -- in the last few months, projects. Usually in Florida, you're not
going to open them during the summer. So starting a couple of months ago, we've opened a couple. And we're going to be opening more
probably every month. We're going to have things opening in Florida.
 
Operator
Ladies and gentlemen, those are all the questions that we have for today. Thank you for joining us on Douglas Elliman's Third Quarter
2022 Earnings Conference Call. This will conclude our call. We hope you have a good day, and you may now disconnect.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
©2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.