CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
Anthony Francis Marone
Blackstone Mortgage Trust, Inc. - MD, CFO, Principal Accounting Officer & Treasurer
 
Katharine A. Keenan
Blackstone Mortgage Trust, Inc. - CEO, President & Director
 
Weston M. Tucker
Blackstone Mortgage Trust, Inc. - Head of IR & Senior MD
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
Donald James Fandetti
Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, Research Division - Senior Analyst
 
Douglas Michael Harter
Crédit Suisse AG, Research Division - Director
 
Eric J. Hagen
BTIG, LLC, Research Division - Research Analyst
 
Jade Joseph Rahmani
Keefe, Bruyette, & Woods, Inc., Research Division - Director
 
Stephen Albert Laws
Raymond James & Associates, Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
 
Steven Cole Delaney
JMP Securities LLC, Research Division - MD, Director of Mortgage & Real Estate Finance Research & Equity
Research Analyst
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Good day, everyone, and welcome to the Blackstone Mortgage Trust Third Quarter 2022 Investor Call hosted by Weston Tucker, Head of
Investor Relations. My name is Ben, and I'm your event manager. (Operator Instructions) I'd like to advise all parties that this conference
is being recorded for replay purposes.
And now I would like to hand it over to your host. Weston, the ground is yours.
 
Weston M. Tucker
Blackstone Mortgage Trust, Inc. - Head of IR & Senior MD
Great. Thanks, Ben, and good morning, and welcome to Blackstone Mortgage Trust's Third Quarter Conference Call. I'm joined today by
Mike Nash, Executive Chairman; Katie Keenan, Chief Executive Officer; Austin Pena, Executive Vice President, Investment; Tony Marone,
Chief Financial Officer; and Tim Hayes, Shareholder Relations. This morning, we filed our 10-Q and issued a press release with a
presentation of our results, which are available on our website and have been filed with the SEC. I'd like to remind everyone that today's
call may include forward-looking statements, which are uncertain and outside of the company's control. Actual results may differ
materially. For a discussion of some of the risks that could affect results, please see the Risk Factors section of our most recent 10-K.
We do not undertake any duty to update forward-looking statements. We will also refer to certain non-GAAP measures on this call. And
for reconciliations, you should refer to the press release and our 10-Q. This audiocast is the copyrighted material of Blackstone Mortgage
Trust and may not be duplicated without our consent. So for the third quarter, we reported GAAP net income per share of $0.60, while
distributable earnings were $0.71 per share. A few weeks ago, we paid a dividend of $0.62 per share with respect to the third quarter. If
you have any questions following today's call, please let Tim or me know.
And with that, I'll now turn things over to Katie.
 
Katharine A. Keenan
Blackstone Mortgage Trust, Inc. - CEO, President & Director
Thanks, Weston. The capital markets today reflect significantly heightened uncertainty around global economic conditions. But on the
ground, BXMT's fundamental performance this quarter once again underscores the stability, resilience, and earnings power of our
business. We have always run this company according to our core principles, low leverage, strong borrowers, and high-quality real estate
backed by a conservatively structured match-funded balance sheet.
The importance of these principles is most apparent in environments like the one we face today. So most institutional real estate owners
expected higher rates to come. The speed and slope of the rate hikes have been more aggressive than anticipated. But given the key
tenets with which we originated our loans, they are well positioned to withstand the impact of higher rates. At the same time, the
growing earnings power across our entire portfolio provides a powerful ballast amid an evolving credit backdrop.
This quarter, we generated $0.71 of distributable earnings, up an impressive 13% year-over-year. Our retained earnings grew book value
even as we increased our reserves, and we drove these robust results while maintaining $1.7 billion of liquidity, more than double our
March 2020 level. We entered the fourth quarter strategically positioned to play offense in a highly opportunistic investment
environment while continuing to generate attractive durable income for our shareholders. The current market reflects a lack of visibility
on the pace of interest rate hikes and where they will settle long term. As a result, asset prices are volatile, impacting liquidity and
restraining investment activities.
And while the public markets are more reactive to this day-to-day uncertainty, what matters for real estate over time is fundamental
performance, high-quality real estate that can capture rent growth is resilient in inflationary environments as replacement cost rises and
cash flows outpaced higher OpEx and rates. There is nearly $400 billion of institutional real estate capital sitting on the sidelines. And
while it will take time, as the rate picture crystallizes, liquidity will flow back to hard assets that generate attractive yields.
If long-term rates settle out in the range of their current levels, some asset values will need to reset. But unlike the GFC, there is neither
overleveraged nor overbuilding weighing on the system, and most reasonably levered capital structures will be able to absorb a reset in
rates with an impact to the equity returns, but still a positive outcome for the debt. This quarter, we saw once again that the BXMT
portfolio is weathering the capital market storm. A result of the low basis at which we start our senior loans, our credit selection process,
our rigorous loan structuring, and our sponsorship.
We continue to see that the value-add business plans we lend against can capture increasing rents in an inflationary environment, which
should support asset values and credit performance over time. Moreover, 96% of the loans in our portfolio have rate caps, which insulate
borrowers from further rate increases or other structural enhancements, including carrying guarantees or substantial interest reserves.
The result is our continued 100% interest collection despite a 300 basis point increase in SOFR since the beginning of the year. While our
positive experience to date is an important indicator, as a lender, we naturally consider many scenarios, including the potential for
conditions to further deteriorate. In this respect, we look to the position and incentives of our borrowers. With an average loan LTV of
64% at origination, our sponsors have 36 points of equity to protect as a starting point.
Even in a materially higher rate scenario, the incremental carry costs borne by borrowers represent a small fraction of the overall deal
capitalization, just 1 to 2 points of additional equity a year, well within our sponsor's capabilities and justified for assets with value to
protect over the long term. This commitment is reflected in the behavior we saw in the pandemic when our sponsors injected over $0.5
billion of additional cash to carry their assets. And we see analogous behavior today with our sponsors having invested $275 million of
incremental cash equity so far this year.
Turning to the office sector. While the office segment faces secular headwinds, it is further impacted today by regulatory pressure at
banks and a broad brush approach typical in periods of economic pullback. There are many older vintage commodity office buildings that
will suffer. But there is also a significant segment of the institutional market where the high-quality office is seeing continued kind of
demand and print growth.
For example, this quarter saw New York City's strongest leasing activity since COVID, up 28% year-over-year and roughly 10% above the
third quarter '19 and the 5-year pre-COVID average. And that leasing activity is concentrated in Class A building, which despite being
only 1/3 of New York City's stock captured 74% of leasing in the third quarter. In most of our office portfolio, we see stable occupancy,
ongoing sponsor commitment, and particularly notable in today's environment, continued repayments with $349 million in office loans
repaying over the last 3 months, including a vacant New York City office slated for renovation, which just occurred post quarter end. 
Our office portfolio is 92% Class A, 100% performing, and generally characterized by high-quality, well-amenitized buildings that are
outperforming in today's leasing environment. A 1/3 of our collateral is brand-new construction, including the new build headquarters of
Pfizer and Warner Bros. And across our portfolio, we have assets recently leased to major law firms and creative users, private equity
finance, and tax. We lend to highly experienced, well-capitalized sponsors like Kishnspire, Oaktree-related, and JPMorgan.
And this year, our borrowers have contributed over $150 million of new incremental equity to our office deals alone, indicative of the
value they have to protect and their continued commitment to the assets. While we believe the vast majority of our office portfolio is
well-positioned for the post-COVID environment, we downgraded 4 office loans to 4s this quarter. These loans, which represent just 3%
of our portfolio, continue to perform, pay interest, and, in most cases, show positive leasing and material recent sponsor cash
commitments. 
But having evaluated each asset in our portfolio in detail, we felt downgrades were warranted in these specific cases, denoting a
heightened risk of underperformance. We remain focused on actively managing these loans as well as our broader office portfolio in this
more liquid environment. Importantly, the overall performance of our collateral assets across the portfolio continues to show strength.
We also had upgrades this quarter as assets ramped up and stabilized. With higher rates and less overall transaction activity in the
market, assets that have completed their business plans are staying in our portfolio longer as patient sponsors opt to hold rather than
sell into the current conditions.
We are also keeping a close eye on Europe and the U.K. in light of rising inflation, elevated energy costs, and increasing economic
uncertainty. Our underwriting process is consistent across borders. Just as in the U.S., we have been highly selective about sponsorship,
real estate quality, and credit in our European lending practices. Our collateral is concentrated in high-conviction sectors, and in many
cases, the LTVs on these loans are lower relative to similar U.S. transactions.
And just as in the U.S., we have seen strong, consistent credit performance in our Europe book. Notwithstanding the macro challenges,
the dislocation in Europe today is presenting appealing investment opportunities. This quarter, our primary origination activities were in
cross-diversified pools of European industrial where vacancy is 1.5%, and the rent growth is nearly 20%. Our overall originations this
quarter averaged 58% LTV and an all-in yield of 541 over base rates, a high single-digit all-in unlevered return.
With the securitization market frozen and banks seeking to reduce their balance sheet exposure, we expect a target-rich environment in
the U.S. as well. While regular way transaction flow is more limited, given the disconnect between buyers and sellers on valuations, we
are starting to see both recapitalizations at reset basis and secondary loan purchase opportunities where we can partner with motivated
counterparties to provide liquidity at compelling risk-adjusted returns. Going forward, we expect an increasingly attractive investment
environment, and we are fortunate to have ample dry powder to address it.
Turning to the balance sheet. Our liquidity risk management approach and diversification put us on solid footing to address this more
volatile but opportunistic environment. Our robust liquidity position today is by design. The result of our actions early in 2022, when
seeing hints of dislocation in other corners of the market, we opted to fortify our capital base and slow regular way originations to best
position ourselves for what we thought ahead. And from the outset of our business, we have run a matched balance sheet, insulating our
performance from term, currency, and interest rate risk.
We have diversified sources of corporate and asset-level capital, a material advantage in an environment where much of the market is
sidelined. As a premier investor and one of the largest owners of real estate in the world, Blackstone is a trusted partner of the banks.
Our track record as a borrower affords us best-in-class terms throughout our business and helps us to secure lending capital as banks
consolidate business to their top clients, including a new GBP 1 billion credit facility just this quarter.
Looking ahead much depends on the sales management of the delicate balance between inflation and recession. But our navigation of
this turbulent market is deeply informed by the unparalleled investment experience and knowledge base of the Blackstone platform,
which has a long history of performing for investors through cycles. BXMT's track record, including the last period of severe dislocation in
2020 through today evidences the results of our positioning, stable, asset and liability performance, and highly attractive earnings
growth that is rare in today's market. With a floating rate portfolio, our income is still growing. 
The third quarter average SOFR was 2.45, and it is already 120 basis points higher at 365 today. For our asset-sensitive portfolio, each
incremental 100 basis point increase in rates results in $0.06 of increased earnings quarterly, all else equal. This powerful earnings
dynamic creates meaningful resilience for our business in 2 ways: first, building book value, which helps insulate against increasing
reserves or potential credit issues, and second, ensuring our dividend remains well covered in a wide range of scenarios. Together, these
elements strongly support our ability to deliver a reliable overall return to our shareholders, even if credit conditions weaken.
Today, BXMT is trading at roughly 80% of book value, 8.5x P/E, and a 10.3% dividend yield. Metrics that we do not believe reflect the
resilience of our business model and earnings stream, our long-term credit track record, or the clear differentiation of the Blackstone real
estate platform. Our current dividend yield is 620 basis points above the tenure, well wide of our pre-Covid average, despite our company
now having growing earnings, significantly stronger dividend coverage, a high integrity balance sheet with more than double the
liquidity, and a performing portfolio that has been reoriented to stand up to today's inflationary pressures. 
Less than 10% of U.S. stocks today offer yields above the 10-year treasury rate, and we are paying a dividend yield that is more than 2.5x
that level. We've paid that dividend for 29 consecutive quarters, and we're covering at over 115% today. In a volatile market, current
income is key, and BXMT is delivering.
With that, I'll turn it over to Tony.
 
Anthony Francis Marone
Blackstone Mortgage Trust, Inc. - MD, CFO, Principal Accounting Officer & Treasurer
Thank you, Katie, and good morning, everyone. This quarter's results showcased the positive impact of rising rates on BXMT's floating
rate loan portfolio with another consecutive quarter of meaningful earnings growth, supported by the stability in our book value, portfolio
metrics, and capitalization. We reported a GAAP net income of $0.60 per share and distributable earnings of $0.71, which is up $0.04
from 2Q and $0.09 or 15% from 1Q levels.
This reflects the positive impact of rising base rates on our 99% performing loan portfolio continuing to flow through to our bottom line
net income. As central banks continue to battle inflation, the market continues to further -- to forecast further increases in base rates,
which will similarly provide a tailwind to BXMT's earnings. Comparing to 3Q levels, an incremental 100 basis point increase in base rates
would generate $0.06 of quarterly earnings per share net of incentive fees, assuming all else is equal. 
Similar to Q2, our earnings this quarter had no meaningful prepayment income as overall market transaction volume has been muted,
and we collected $443 million of repayments across our portfolio. This compares to $697 million of loan funding, leading to a consistent
overall portfolio size of $26 billion and therefore, stability in our capital deployed and net interest income generation. As Katie noted, our
portfolio of credit remains strong with no new impairments or nonaccrual loans and a net $937 million of loans upgraded with 10 risk
rating upgrades this quarter outpacing 5 downgrades.
Overall, our total portfolio is currently 89% risk-rated 1, 2, or 3, which reflects the overall strength and stability of our borrowers and
collateral assets. We increased our CECL loan loss reserve by $0.07 per share this quarter and $0.13 year-to-date, which amount does
not include any specific loan reserves but rather is reflective of uncertainty in the broader economy and the related potential impact on
our loan portfolio over time as required by the CECL accounting rules.
While our CECL reserve does not impact distributable earnings, it does reduce our GAAP net income and book value per share.
Notwithstanding this impact, our book value was still up slightly this quarter to $27.20 as our earnings more than covered our dividend,
adding $0.10 to book value. Importantly, excess earnings will grow book value, benefiting our stockholders and offsetting the impact of
higher reserves. In addition, in a period when the pound declined by 17%, and the euro declined by 14%, we saw virtually no impact on
our book value as our local currency financing and programmatic foreign currency hedging offset the asset-level currency volatility.
Although transaction volume was muted this quarter as new lending activity declined generally across the market, we did close $438
million of new loans at lower-than-average LTVs and above-average spreads.
Consistent with our focus on the balance sheet and liquidity management, we obtained committed financing for substantially all of the
$697 million we funded under new and existing loans this quarter. This is evidence that although we have seen banks pull back amid the
choppy market conditions, we remain a favorite client with our track record of strong, consistent performance in our portfolio of
high-quality, low-leverage assets. Importantly, we have maintained and, in many cases, strengthened the resiliency of our credit facilities
to market downturns. Looking at our total financings outstanding, 64% is either structurally immune from any market provision --
mark-to-market provisions or is limited to margin calls on defaulted assets only, with no capital markets margin call provisions on any of
our financing.
With the strong credit performance of our loan portfolio and the stability of our capital structure, we will receive 0 margin calls in the
history of BXMT, including during the challenging market conditions experienced at the peak of the pandemic in 2020. We maintain a
term-matched asset-level financing structure and have no material corporate debt maturities until 2026, giving us a very stable platform
from which to manage our business through more volatile market conditions. Further, we increased liquidity to a record $1.7 billion and
nearly a 60% increase from this time last year, giving us capital to deploy opportunistically or reserve to defend our assets should market
conditions worsen. In closing, we are pleased to report another quarter of earnings growth driven by rising rates with the prospect for
further growth as this trend continues.
We have also considered potential downside scenarios should further rate increases or other market factors lead to any nonperformance
in our portfolio. Although there is a broad range of potential outcomes given the current market conditions, we believe our superior credit
selection and fortified balance sheet will endure, and our strong earnings will continue to provide clear support for our book value and
quarterly dividend. In periods of high inflation, we believe that the value generated for investors by dividend income becomes
increasingly important, and we look forward to continuing our track record of a reliable and attractive dividend through varied market
conditions.
With that, I'll ask the operator to open the call to questions.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) Our first question comes from Donald Fandetti from Wells Fargo.
 
Donald James Fandetti
Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, Research Division - Senior Analyst
Katie, the 4 office loans that moved to rating, I believe. Can you talk a little bit about the quality of the sponsor? And did they have -- is
their view that there's enough equity in the properties? Because I think that's one of the risk in this environment is that values have gone
down. So I think you could see property owners more likely to walk away from an asset.
 
Katharine A. Keenan
Blackstone Mortgage Trust, Inc. - CEO, President & Director
Sure. Thanks, Don. So we downgraded 4 loans to 4 this quarter, just 3% of the portfolio, and determined the downgrades were
warranted, I think, given the unique headwinds each of the assets faces. In some cases, locations in more challenged markets or
submarkets like D.C. or Chicago as well as looking at the specific circumstances. I think it is important to note, as I mentioned on the call,
all of the assets have had recent sponsored cash commitments, some very material.
And so these really are assets that not underperformance, but where posters are still investing capital and where we don't expect -- we're
not looking at impairments, that would be a 5 rating. I think it's also worth noting we've had 8 4-rated loans since COVID and all have
been performing consistently for a 2-year period. One actually repaid this quarter. So when we look at our 4 rated loans, we're looking at
an increased risk of underperformance. We're looking at our underwriting, what we're seeing in the market, but we do still have
committed sponsors in most cases, and we're working towards either repayments or sales to get these assets moving on.
 
Donald James Fandetti
Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, Research Division - Senior Analyst
Okay. And then my follow-up is just on net portfolio growth. Is this sort of an environment where it's all about defense, there's not going
to be much growth? Or do you still plan on growing the portfolio?
 
Katharine A. Keenan
Blackstone Mortgage Trust, Inc. - CEO, President & Director
I think as we look at the investment environment today, there's a lot of really interesting opportunities. But really, we're in the very
fortunate position of having a well-invested portfolio that's creating tremendous earnings power and delivering very strong current
income. So we're going to have a very high bar for new investments. We obviously are looking at them. But I think that we should expect
a strong well-invested portfolio going forward, but more consistency. And consistency between originations and repayments to keep that
earnings power very stable.
 
Operator
Our second question comes from Doug Harter from Crédit Suisse.
 
Douglas Michael Harter
Crédit Suisse AG, Research Division - Director
You've been talking about office. Can you talk about your willingness or your appetite to look at new office loans and whether you would
find any new opportunities attractive?
 
Katharine A. Keenan
Blackstone Mortgage Trust, Inc. - CEO, President & Director
Sure. I think it's going to start from our overall perspective on the market today, which, as I mentioned, is definitely a high bar, and
thinking a lot about underwriting debt service coverage, near, medium, long term, and uses for our capital in more interesting ways, i.e.,
legacy loan acquisitions, helping the banks reduce some of their exposures, those types of unique opportunities that we think can
generate really outsized risk-return profiles. In the office market, generally, I think we've been very consistent in that we really see a very
strong bifurcation in the market. So new builds are well positioned in markets with dynamic tenant demand, pre-leasing, and things like
that. We would certainly look at opportunities like that. And we really see that as a different part of the market than the segment that is
the most challenging.
 
Douglas Michael Harter
Crédit Suisse AG, Research Division - Director
And then just to follow up on your comment about legacy loan acquisitions. I guess just how do you kind of get comfortable with
someone else's underwriting and just kind of the quality of loans versus something that you've underwritten from the start?
 
Katharine A. Keenan
Blackstone Mortgage Trust, Inc. - CEO, President & Director
Sure. I think this is where the Blackstone platform really shines. I mean, we have incredibly detailed and up-to-the-minute real-time
information on what's going on in markets. We have a great origination team. This business was really born in a period where there were
a lot of loan portfolio acquisitions, the GE portfolio acquisition was really formative for the BXMT business generally. And we have, I
think, a great capacity to put a slot team of really talented people to sort of crawl all over our loan portfolios and get a sense of how we
view the underwriting in today's environment and really look at the structure of the documentation and all of that, I think it's something
we've done successfully over time, and we're really well positioned today, both from a team and platform information perspective as well
as our relationships with potential counterparties that might be looking for liquidity.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from Steve Delaney from JMP Securities.
 
Steven Cole Delaney
JMP Securities LLC, Research Division - MD, Director of Mortgage & Real Estate Finance Research & Equity
Research Analyst
Congrats on a nice quarter and a very volatile market. Katy, I'd like to ask about repayments. Obviously, things have slowed down, but it
works out the $40-some million worked out to about 7% annualized on the portfolio. How should we think about that going forward?
Normally, we would think a bridge loan portfolio would be, what, 20%, 20%, 30% a year in terms of runoff. So just your repay outlook.
 
Katharine A. Keenan
Blackstone Mortgage Trust, Inc. - CEO, President & Director
Yes, absolutely. I mean, I think that with the way the transaction market is today and looking at all of the factors, we definitely expect
overall transaction volumes to come down, and that's on the origination side and the repayment side. With the transaction market
cooling, some of the deals that would ordinarily have repaid are sticking around longer. In a lot of cases, that's because patient sponsors
are doing their sort of hold versus sell analysis, and they just like the hold size better. I think you can see that in our risk ratings. We have
more ones and 2 today as a percentage than is typical. And in other cases, we're going to have situations where people need a little bit
more time to execute their business plans.
And because of the way we structure our loan, that's really a great opportunity for us to get more equity in the door to support the
business plans, reduce our loan, et cetera. And so I think over time, we'll see a little more portfolio. But most importantly, as we talked
about earlier, the earnings power is really dictated by the investment level and the deployment of the portfolio. And so, a more stable
portfolio is positive from an earnings perspective.
 
Steven Cole Delaney
JMP Securities LLC, Research Division - MD, Director of Mortgage & Real Estate Finance Research & Equity
Research Analyst
For sure. And those extensions that you have, in addition to getting more cash in from the borrower, do you have a repricing opportunity
at that time as well in some cases?
 
Katharine A. Keenan
Blackstone Mortgage Trust, Inc. - CEO, President & Director
Yes, we do, potentially. And I think that we really look at all of those conversations as new investment decisions where we think very
carefully about the balance of pricing, term structure, new equity coming in, and really they bring to bear what I think is a very
sophisticated asset management approach and new information, new underwriting to make sure that we're creating the most value that
we can for our shareholders.
 
Operator
The following question comes from Eric Hagen from BTIG.
 
Eric J. Hagen
BTIG, LLC, Research Division - Research Analyst
Can you guys talk about the sensitivity of cap rates in the portfolio to rising interest rates and how you see that developing, especially at
the short end of the curve, and the sensitivity that you see there?
 
Katharine A. Keenan
Blackstone Mortgage Trust, Inc. - CEO, President & Director
Sure. So I think when we think about the rate sensitivity at the short end of the curve, we really look at debt service coverage and the
performance of our portfolio. As I mentioned in the remarks, 96% of our loans have either interest rate caps or other very meaningful
structural enhancements like carrying guarantees. So I think as far as the short end, it's not going to have a material impact on our
borrowers' ability to pay because there really is a lot of structural enhancement already built into the loans. As we think about cap rates
over time, I think it really depends on a number of factors. Obviously, cap rates are related to interest rates. They're also related to
growth in the portfolio, and growth in NOI.
And we're seeing continued NOI growth in the asset sectors that we've been focused on. Inflation-protected sectors like multifamily,
hospitality, industrial, things with short-duration leases, and even very high-quality office are seeing very strong rent growth. And so,
looking at cap rates in the context of growing NOI, obviously, values will be impacted more so by cap rates going up than if we just had
NOI growth. But there's a balance between NOI growth and cap rates. And that's what we really use when we look at the long-term
values of our assets, think about the risk in the portfolio, and think about new originations.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from Jade Rahmani from KBW.
 
Jade Joseph Rahmani
Keefe, Bruyette, & Woods, Inc., Research Division - Director
The upcoming portfolio loan maturities. Can you speak to that? What do you have expected for the fourth quarter in 2023? And how
much of that is office? Does it resemble the overall portfolio mix? Or is there any weighting toward office?
 
Katharine A. Keenan
Blackstone Mortgage Trust, Inc. - CEO, President & Director
Sure. So I think worth noting when you look at the upcoming loan maturities. They're really pretty minimal. It's about 7% of the portfolio
over through the end of 2023. So as we've talked about in past years, most of our loans, we kind of addressed them well ahead, whether
it's because borrowers are executing their business plans and moving on or we think about other ways to have borrowers recommit to
their assets.
So we don't see upcoming maturities as sort of a very heavy schedule. I would say, as far as the specifics, there's a lot of loans that
already have plans in place for refi or sale. And on the others, I would refer back to the remarks I made a bit earlier as far as the approach
we take with borrowers. In general, we really are willing to reward patient borrowers. We're interested in putting more capital in the
deals, and that's what we've seen by and large.
 
Jade Joseph Rahmani
Keefe, Bruyette, & Woods, Inc., Research Division - Director
Made a construction loan $670 million on looks like a Class A potential development in downtown Austin. Can you confirm that, that's
the case? And would that be a fourth-quarter origination? Given its construction, I wouldn't assume there's a large amount of upfront
funding there.
 
Katharine A. Keenan
Blackstone Mortgage Trust, Inc. - CEO, President & Director
Yes. That was actually a second-quarter origination. I think the trade picked it up a little later on versus the origination. But we love that
project. That is really going to be a best-in-class asset. And I think it really speaks to our broader focus on the flight to quality. We think
that the best assets well located are going to outperform, whether it's an office or multifamily, or hotel of that project is a mixed-use
project.
It's also a low-leverage construction loan with one of the best sponsors in our portfolio. So overall, looking at those types of opportunities
where we have the opportunity to lend at a low leverage level on the newest best quality in the market, we like to see those. But again,
that was the second-quarter deal. And I think we talked about it a bit on the second quarter call for more detail.
 
Operator
Our final question comes from Stephen Laws from Raymond James.
 
Stephen Albert Laws
Raymond James & Associates, Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
Katy, I'd like to start first with maybe how conversations with counterparties, particularly around the fired loan, didn't change. So maybe
the 4-rated bucket. When we see 4 loans with rating changes, that's an internal metric. How are your current conversations going with
your counterparties around credit marks? How are they looking at watch-list-type assets, specifically around the office? Kind of any
discussions with what you're seeing with -- in those discussions.
 
Katharine A. Keenan
Blackstone Mortgage Trust, Inc. - CEO, President & Director
Yes. I think we maintain a really open and active dialogue with all of our lenders, and they're very involved, and as just being on
everything that's going on in the portfolio in real time. I think, in general, when you look at our lenders, we have great long-term
relationships with them. They trust us to manage the portfolios in the best possible way. They have really well-performing portfolios. And
of course, they look at our overall business and we have more income and more liquidity than we've really ever had. And that gives them
a strong degree of confidence in us as a borrower and a counterparty. So I really have not seen any material change in terms of our
dialogue with our lenders.
 
Stephen Albert Laws
Raymond James & Associates, Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
And then, as a follow-up, I appreciate the disclosure and commentary around rate caps and structural protection, effectively all of the
portfolios. But can you talk in a little bit more detail there? Where is the weighted average on those weights recaps, how much are in the
money, new originations? Where are you putting those in? And is it a different level than where those were going into loans as far as a
spread basis a year or 2 ago? Any additional color you can provide on the details?
 
Katharine A. Keenan
Blackstone Mortgage Trust, Inc. - CEO, President & Director
Sure. So starting with new originations, we have always adhered to a policy rate cap on our loans. We're very focused on making sure that
we involve a sort of up-to-the-minute structure on the loans that we originate. And that's really been a consistent touchstone of our
origination approach over the years and, obviously, the same today. I think the rate caps we have in the portfolio, we are seeing more and
more of them in the money. They obviously come in at different levels.
But I think the credit performance and the interest collection we've seen in the portfolio is an indication of the fact that our structures are
working. And we continue to have the rate cap roll. When loans come upon maturity or interim maturity, borrowers need to buy new rate
caps, and we're seeing other equity come in with more interest reserves and more structural protection. So I think that that part of the
structure is sort of a key difference in terms of how lenders can weather an environment like this and something that we've been very
focused on in our portfolio.
 
Operator
Thank you. And now, I am happy to hand it back to Weston Tucker for closing remarks.
 
Weston M. Tucker
Blackstone Mortgage Trust, Inc. - Head of IR & Senior MD
Thanks, everyone, for joining us today, and I look forward to following up after the call. Thank you.
 
Operator
Thank you for joining, everyone. That concludes your conference. You may now disconnect. Please enjoy the rest of your day. Goodbye.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
©2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.