CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
Charles J. Meyers
Equinix, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
 
Katrina Rymill
Equinix, Inc. - VP of IR
 
Keith D. Taylor
Equinix, Inc. - CFO
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
Ahmed Sami Badri
Crédit Suisse AG, Research Division - Senior Analyst
 
Aryeh Klein
BMO Capital Markets Equity Research - United States Real Estate Analyst
 
Jonathan Atkin
RBC Capital Markets, Research Division - MD & Senior Analyst
 
Matthew Niknam
Deutsche Bank AG, Research Division - Director
 
Michael Ian Rollins
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - MD & U.S. Telecoms Analyst
 
Simon William Flannery
Morgan Stanley, Research Division - MD
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Good afternoon, and welcome to the Equinix Third Quarter Earnings Conference Call. (Operator Instructions) Also, today's conference is
being recorded. (Operator Instructions)
I would now like to turn the conference over to Katrina Rymill, Senior Vice President of Corporate Finance and Sustainability. You may
begin.
 
Katrina Rymill
Equinix, Inc. - VP of IR
Good afternoon, and welcome to today's conference call. Before we get started, I'd like to remind everyone that some of the statements
we'll be making today are forward-looking in nature and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may vary significantly from those
statements and may be affected by the risks we identified in today's press release and those identified in our filings with the SEC,
including our most recent Form 10-K filed on February 18, 2022, and 10-Q filed on July 29, 2022. Equinix assumes no obligation and does
not intend to update or comment on forward-looking statements made on this call. In addition, in light of Regulation Fair Disclosure, it is
Equinix' policy not to comment on its financial guidance during the quarter, unless it is done through an exclusive public disclosure.
In addition, we will provide non-GAAP measures on today's conference call. We provide a reconciliation of those measures to the most
directly comparable GAAP measures and a list of the reasons why the company uses these measures in today's press release on the
Equinix IR page at www.equinix.com. We have made available on the IR page of our website a presentation designed to accompany this
discussion, along with certain supplemental financial information and other data. We'd also like to remind you that we post important
information about Equinix on the IR page from time to time and encourage you to check our website regularly for the most current
available information.
With us today are Charles Meyers, Equinix' CEO and President; and Keith Taylor, Chief Financial Officer. Following our prepared remarks,
we'll be taking questions from sell-side analysts. (Operator Instructions)
At this time, I'll turn the call over to Charles.
 
Charles J. Meyers
Equinix, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Thanks, Katrina. Good afternoon, and welcome to our third quarter earnings call. We had another outstanding quarter as global demand
for digital infrastructure continues to grow, and customer preferences trend convincingly toward architectures that are highly distributed,
persistently hybrid, deeply cloud connected and increasingly on demand, all factors fueling the Equinix position as a trusted partner in
digital transformation. This vigorous demand backdrop fueled another great quarter, delivering record gross and net bookings with
strong demand across all 3 regions, resulting in our 79th quarter of consecutive revenue growth and further demonstrating the resiliency
and durability of our business even in the face of a complex and challenging macro environment.
It is increasingly evident that the global pandemic has been a catalyst for a fundamental shift in how customers view digital
transformation and its importance as a strategic imperative. And this commitment to digital transformation continues even in the face of
a broader dynamic of belt tightening as companies look to do more with less and see digital as a catalyst to both maximize revenues and
optimize costs.
While we continue to closely monitor macro conditions and adapt our execution accordingly, the fundamentals of our business remain
exceptionally strong. Our expansive global reach and robust interconnected ecosystems continue to attract a wide and diverse customer
set as they prioritize digital investments and embrace Platform Equinix as a point of nexus to support hybrid and multi-cloud. This wave
of digital infrastructure demand and our highly differentiated value proposition are translating to a robust pipeline, a highly favorable
pricing environment and low churn, all fueling record performance across the business year-to-date and setting us up for a strong
trajectory as we look to 2023 and beyond.
As customers navigate rising interest rates and broad-based inflation, they're benefiting from our scaled purchasing power and our
sophisticated capabilities in hedging, risk management and sustainability. Our operating scale and scope give us a variety of levers to
manage an increasingly dynamic environment, hedging currency, power and interest rates, investing in advanced procurement teams,
expanding renewables coverage and taking a programmatic approach to improving the efficiency of our world-class data centers, an
advanced set of capabilities supported by a strong and flexible balance sheet.
Specifically, on power, we have had a keen focus in this area and continue to feel confident in our position. Our approach to multiyear
hedging is affording Equinix the visibility and predictability to communicate to customers in advance of expected power price increases
and is allowing us to deliver cost points to customers that remain highly favorable against spot rates in many markets as volatility
persists. While our aim remains to dampen this volatility for our customers through hedging, we do expect meaningful increases in power
costs in many markets. And per our contracts, the full impact of these additional power costs will be passed on to customers. Overall, we
believe we remain in a good position relative to competitors and the broader market.
Turning to our results. As depicted on Slide 3, revenues for Q3 were $1.84 billion, up 11% over the same quarter last year, driven by strong
recurring revenue growth. Adjusted EBITDA was up 11% year-over-year with AFFO meaningfully ahead of our expectations due to strong
operating performance. Interconnection revenues continue to outpace the broader business, growing 13% year-over-year. These growth
rates are all on a normalized and constant currency basis.
Equinix continues to extend its leadership as the most interconnected platform with 4 on-ramp wins this quarter, bringing the total in our
portfolio to more than 200 on-ramps across 44 markets. We now have 11 metros across Platform Equinix enabled with on-ramps from all
5 of the leading cloud providers. No other competitor has more than one. In addition to placing critical networking nodes and on-ramps
at Equinix, hyperscalers are also integral to our go-to-market motion as customers continue to aggressively migrate workloads to the
cloud and demand cloud proximity for their own private cloud implementations.
As indicated in our recently published Global Interconnection Index, current trend lines indicate that more than 80% of Global 2000
companies will be interconnecting with more than 4 hyperscale providers and over 30 SaaS providers or other business partners on
average by 2026.
We're continuing to invest behind the momentum we're seeing in our data center services business with 46 major projects underway
across 31 markets in 21 countries. We continue to build capacity under our xScale offering, including 10 ongoing xScale projects that we
expect will deliver another 80 megawatts of capacity once opened. This quarter, we added 6 new projects, including new data center
builds in Barcelona, Tokyo and our first organic build in Jakarta, Indonesia. Our new IBX in Jakarta will add a strategically important
high-growth market to our platform as we look to enable local businesses and global organizations to unleash Indonesia's digital
potential.
This commitment to market-leading reach continues to drive our business with customers operating in all 3 regions now accounting for
an amazing 64% of our recurring revenues. Key customer expansions this quarter included StackPath, a leading edge computing
platform provider, which expanded into Dubai and Mumbai to support the growth of its worldwide edge compute, delivery and security
offerings; a win with a global multinational airline leveraging Equinix to connect to their federated ecosystem of partner airlines; as well
as a significant multi-metro expansion with one of the world's largest custodian banks, deploying across all 3 regions and utilizing the
full suite of Equinix digital services.
On that note, our digital services portfolio saw continued momentum as companies increasingly demand infrastructure and
interconnection services that can be delivered as a service and on demand. Equinix Metal had a strong bookings quarter as customers
leveraged flexibility and agility across multiple metros. Wins this quarter included a major design win with a global SaaS provider and a
significant expansion with a leading pediatric treatment and research facility using Network Edge and Equinix Fabric to create an edge
hosting environment in key U.S. metros and enable seamless and high-performance connectivity to their cloud partners.
In Q3, we added an incremental 7,300 interconnections and now have over 443,000 total interconnections on our platform. Equinix
Fabric had another strong quarter as interconnection diversity continues to increase. Expansions this quarter included Colt Technology
Services further expanding its footprint in Europe and interconnectivity with Equinix Fabric to optimize performance for its customers as
well as a financial software tools and enterprise applications provider implementing a global network optimization project leveraging
Equinix Fabric.
Internet Exchange saw peak traffic up 8% quarter-over-quarter and 28% year-over-year to greater than 27 terabits per second,
representing the largest peak traffic growth since prior to the pandemic.
Our channel program delivered a sixth consecutive record quarter, accounting for 37% of bookings and approximately 60% of new logos
and remains a critical vector in how we are expanding our reach and scaling our go-to-market engine. We continue to see particular
strength from strategic cloud technology and systems integrator partners like AWS, Cisco, Dell, Google, HPE, Infosys and Microsoft. This
segment accounted for approximately half of our channel bookings and continues to grow in both deal dollar -- deal and dollar volume.
With these partners, we jointly offer a blend of IT and networking technologies that allow customers to interconnect seamlessly with
hyperscale cloud and other as-a-service providers and benefit from solutions that deliver optimal performance, cost, security, agility and
scale across our global platform. Channel wins included a U.K. insurance firm with Equinix partner, Softcat, for a data center
consolidation and modernization project at our London campus where technology elements from HPE, Cisco and Palo Alto Networks are
being brought together in a cloud-adjacent architecture, all directly interconnected to Microsoft and AWS.
Now let me turn the call over to Keith and cover the results for the quarter.
 
Keith D. Taylor
Equinix, Inc. - CFO
Thanks, Charles, and good afternoon to everyone. As you can see from our results, the Equinix team continues to execute for our
customers, our communities and for our investors. Our go-to-market engine delivered record gross and net bookings in Q3, closing over
4,200 deals with more than 3,000 customers. Our success is derived from the breadth of our service offering, the scale of our growing
platform, the quality of our operations organization and the focus of our investing for the longer term.
For the quarter, our net bookings performance moved up significantly both compared to our Q3 expectations and the same quarter last
year due to strong gross activity, a favorable pricing environment, lower-than-expected churn and the strength of our digital services
offerings. Again, we had net positive pricing actions. Consequently, our consolidated MRR per cabinet increased to greater than $2,000
per cabinet despite the weaker foreign operating currencies.
A note: the expected price increases or PPIs discussed by Charles are not in either our reported or our guided numbers. These price
increases will be passed through to our customers in 2023. Over the past couple of months, we've been communicating with our
customers about the pending power price increases. And most recently, we've notified them of the expected range of their power cost
increase at the market level. The dialogue with our customers highlighted the value of our multiyear power planning and sourcing
efforts, which is expected to meaningfully dampen the impact of inflated energy cost to many of our customers, both relative to the
competition and the broader market.
Finally, notwithstanding the strong bookings performance in Q3, our forward-looking pipeline remains healthy. And our backlog and our
book-to-bill interval remains constant, allowing us to remain confident as we look ahead into Q4 and plan for 2023. So given the
momentum in our business, we're again raising our underlying guidance across each of our core financial metrics for the year.
Now while our business remains well positioned and resilient, we continue to keep macro factors top of mind. Consequently, we chose to
increase the liquidity position of the company. At quarter end, we had over $2.5 billion of unrestricted cash in our bank accounts and full
access to our $4 billion line of credit, increasing the financial and operational flexibility of the business. Our net leverage remains low at
3.5x our adjusted EBITDA, creating plenty of balance sheet flexibility.
Now let me cover the highlights for the quarter and note that all comments in this section are on a normalized and constant currency
basis. As depicted on Slide 4, global Q3 revenues were $1.841 billion, up 11% over the same quarter last year, above the top end of our
guidance range on an FX-neutral basis, largely due to strong recurring revenues. Q3 revenues net of our FX hedges included a $9 million
impact when compared to our prior guidance rates, largely due to weaker euro and British pounds.
Global Q3 adjusted EBITDA was $871 million or 47% of revenues, up 11% over the same quarter last year, above the top end of our
guidance range due to strong cash gross profit and lower-than-planned operating costs, including professional fees and consulting
costs. Q3 adjusted EBITDA net of our FX hedges included a $5 million FX impact when compared to our prior guidance rates and $4
million of integration costs.
Global Q3 AFFO was $712 million, above our expectations due to strong operating performance and lower net interest expense and
included a $5 million FX impact when compared to our prior guidance rates. Global Q3 MRR churn was 1.9%, a continued reflection of
our disciplined sales execution to put the right customer with the right application into the right asset. For Q4, we expect MRR churn to
continue to trend at the lower end of our 2% to 2.5% per quarter range.
Turning to our regional highlights, whose full results are covered on Slides 5 through 7. APAC was the fastest-growing region on a
year-over-year normalized MRR basis at 19%, followed by the Americas and EMEA regions at 11% and 10%, respectively.
The Americas region had another great quarter with strong gross bookings, lower MRR churn and favorable pricing trends led by our
Washington, D.C. and New York metros. In August, we added Lima, Peru to our platform as part of the Entel acquisition, expanding our
Latin American footprint to a fifth country and extending the Equinix platform to 32 countries and 71 markets globally. Our EMEA region
delivered another record bookings quarter with strong pricing and robust channel activity led by our Amsterdam, Dublin and Frankfurt
markets with strength in our IT services and enterprise verticals.
And finally, the Asia Pacific region had a strong quarter with robust exports from Japan. As part of our Future First sustainability
strategy, we're very proud to announce our partnership with the Centre for Energy Research & Technology at the National University of
Singapore to explore sustainable technologies and alternate fuel sources for data center infrastructure.
And now looking at our capital structure, please refer to Slide 8. Our balance sheet increased slightly despite the weaker non-U.S.
operating currencies to $29.3 billion, including an unrestricted cash balance of $2.5 billion. Our cash balance increased
quarter-over-quarter due to strong operating cash flow and about $800 million of ATM activity settled in the quarter. As stated
previously, we'll continue to take a balanced and opportunistic approach to accessing the capital markets when conditions are favorable.
On the debt side of the house, on the heels of the rating upgrades from both Fitch and Moody's last quarter, S&P increased their debt
tolerance for the company by 1 leverage turn, thereby increasing the level of flexibility from our balance sheet. We're pleased and
appreciative of the rating improvements over the past quarters and look forward to our continued dialogue with our rating agencies.
Turning to Slide 9. For the quarter, capital expenditures were approximately $553 million, including recurring CapEx of $50 million. In
the quarter, we opened 6 retail projects in Istanbul, Madrid, Manchester, Melbourne, Paris and Toronto and 2 xScale projects in Frankfurt
and London. We also purchased land for development in Monterrey, Mexico.
Our capital investments delivered strong returns, as shown on Slide 10. Our 160 stabilized assets increased recurring revenues by 7%
year-over-year on a constant currency basis. These stabilized assets are now collectively 88% utilized and generate a 29% cash-on-cash
return on the gross PP&E invested.
And finally, please refer to Slides 11 through 15 for our updated summary of 2022 guidance and bridges, including the anticipated
financial results from the Entel Peru purchase. For the full year 2022, due to strong momentum that we're seeing in the organic business,
we now expect our revenues to increase between 10% and 11% on a normalized and constant currency basis over the prior year. Relative
to our prior guidance, we're increasing our underlying revenues by $15 million due to strong recurring revenue performance. We expect
2022 underlying adjusted EBITDA to increase by $46 million compared to our prior guidance due to strong revenue performance and
lower operating spend. We now expect to incur $20 million of integration costs in 2022.
We're raising our underlying 2022 AFFO by $52 million to grow between 10% and 11% on a normalized and constant currency basis due
to strong operating performance and lower net interest expense. And as a result, our AFFO per share is now expected to grow between
9% and 10% on a normalized and constant currency basis, above the top end of our prior guide, including the impact from our Q3 ATM
activity. Finally, 2022 CapEx is now expected to range between $2.1 billion and $2.3 billion, including about $190 million of recurring
CapEx and about $135 million of on-balance sheet xScale spend, down slightly due to timing of expansion spend.
So let me stop here. I'm going to turn the call back to Charles.
 
Charles J. Meyers
Equinix, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Thanks, Keith. Our results this quarter continue to reflect strong execution by our global team and highlight the unique position that
Equinix enjoys in facilitating digital transformation. As we continue to deliver exceptional business results, I want to also highlight our
significant progress in advancing our Future First sustainability commitments.
This quarter, in addition to our continued investments and commitments around environmental sustainability, we're very pleased to have
launched the Equinix Foundation, an employee-driven charitable organization working to advance digital inclusion through
philanthropic grant making and strategic partnerships. The foundation reflects our ongoing commitment to social sustainability, and we
are excited about the work we can do to build a better, more inclusive, more sustainable world, harnessing and amplifying the passion of
our people to help close the digital divide in our communities across the globe.
As we advance Q4 and position for 2023, our highly differentiated position continues to drive strong momentum, robust customer
demand and a deep, high-quality pipeline. We are delivering sustained growth at the top line and AFFO per share while maintaining our
clear focus on driving operating leverage across our business. We continue to effectively exercise multiple growth levers, including
expanded market reach, enhancement of our product portfolio, accelerated new logo capture through our multichannel go-to-market
engine, pricing adjustments that reflect our exceptional value and a commitment to a bold innovation and sustainability agenda, all of
which demonstrates the resilience of Platform Equinix and highlights our ability to deliver distinct and durable value to our customers
and our shareholders.
So let me stop there and open it up for questions.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) Our first question is from Jon Atkin from RBC Capital Markets.
 
Jonathan Atkin
RBC Capital Markets, Research Division - MD & Senior Analyst
Got 2 questions on energy. One is, Keith, if you could maybe refresh us on what portion of cash OpEx this quarter was for energy. And
then on the PIs that you are pushing through starting next year, can you talk a little bit about to what extent it applies to customers that
are in the middle of their contracts versus renewals and new contracts?
 
Keith D. Taylor
Equinix, Inc. - CFO
So Jon, I'll take the first one, and I think I'll pass the second one to Charles. It's roughly 13%. Again, it moves around quarter-on-quarter,
and it's also dependent on, in some cases, the currency movements. But for this year, you should see the range anywhere sort of from
12% to 13% on a per revenue dollar basis.
 
Charles J. Meyers
Equinix, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Yes. And on the PIs, Jon, the -- look, our -- the way our contracts read, we're not impaired in any way from putting those through during
the course of the contract. So they're not limited to when you take renewals. So just to sort of back up and give you a view on -- we talked
a little bit about it in the script, but I think that we'll give you details -- more details when we do the '23 guide. But I think thanks to some
really incredible work by our teams, we feel really good about where we are on that -- on the PI issue and on power generally.
I think we're about 90% plus -- or more than well over 90% hedged in our deregulated markets and are going to be topping off those
positions in the coming weeks and months. And we've already communicated those planned increases to customers and are generally
able, as Keith mentioned in his script, able to provide them with cost points that are meaningfully advantageous relative to current spot
in those markets.
So I think we're going to -- we're in a really good position there. I think we're going to be able to pass this through. Obviously, they're not
yet passed through because we're still operating at our hedged rates from this year. But as they adjust, we've given them the advanced
visibility to what they expect to see. And I think, broadly speaking, they knew it was coming. And I think in a lot of cases, they're pleased
to see that it's not quite as bad as they had feared it might be.
 
Jonathan Atkin
RBC Capital Markets, Research Division - MD & Senior Analyst
And if I could ask a little bit about cloud. We saw a slowing growth at 2 of the 3 largest CSPs, not just percentage, but even in terms of
like incremental revenue dollars. And I wonder what does it mean for your business in terms of maybe affecting the pace of cloud
repatriation. And more broadly, as you look at your cabinet adds, how much of that would you attribute to things like cloud repatriation
versus new logos versus just existing customers upsizing? Maybe talk a little bit about those moving parts.
 
Charles J. Meyers
Equinix, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Yes. Jon, I do think cloud repatriation does happen, but I think it's probably getting more airtime than maybe it really is appropriate. I
mean, I think we're still very early in the movement of clouds from traditional IT architectures into cloud, and that's what we continue to
see. And while I recognize we did see some slowdown from the cloud providers, one, that was impacted significantly by currency. And
two, I think a lot of it, as I looked through those reports and heard, there was sort of reductions in usage-based volume on what are likely
sort of non-mission-critical workloads.
And so I think that as I talk to CIOs, their commitment to moving to cloud-based architectures, their commitment to moving significant
percentages of their overall workloads to public cloud and then integrating that with private cloud infrastructure that needs to be cloud
proximate is still full tilt. And in fact, I talked to a CIO that said that they had -- this Fortune 200-type CIO, but they had an application
estate that was 4,000-plus applications. And when I asked them how many of those have been migrated to cloud, it was in the range of
200. And so a long way to go.
And so if you look at the -- just the quantum of growth that's happening in the cloud, in any given quarter, they're adding 3 -- just the top
5 providers, they're adding $3 billion to $4 billion of incremental recurring revenue. And so I think that it's still a long way to go, and I
think that we continue to be particularly relevant as people think about the way things used to work in IT architectures, they all lived
nicely together rack next to each other in an enterprise data center.
Well, as soon as you start migrating workloads to the cloud and then trying to interface them with your data and applications that you're
still managing on your own, things don't work quite the same. And that's what we're seeing in our pipeline. People are saying, "Hey, I've
got to have my hybrid -- my private cloud, proximate. It's got to be distributed. The applications all have to work together." And so I think
we're still going to continue to see vigorous demand for this migration to hybrid and multi-cloud for the foreseeable future.
 
Operator
Our next question is from Simon Flannery from Morgan Stanley.
 
Simon William Flannery
Morgan Stanley, Research Division - MD
Just a couple, if I could. Just continuing on, it's great to hear the strong demand trends. Are you seeing any softness anywhere, any kind
of -- whether it's Europe or whatever? One of your competitors talked about small enterprise, some pressure at the margin there, and it
seems like there's certainly some caution around the uncertain macro environment. And if you put through some of these power price
increases, does that change some of the profitability dynamics for some of these companies?
And then just on margins, some really good performance I saw in -- particularly in the Americas this quarter. Maybe you can update us
on the 50% target and how Singapore is playing out as we exit 2022.
 
Charles J. Meyers
Equinix, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Sure. There's a lot there, Simon. But let me try to cover it. And if I forget any of it, just bring it back up. But any softness -- look, we are not
blind to sort of the challenging macro conditions in which we're all operating, that's for sure. But I would say that our bookings trajectory,
our sales execution, our pipeline, quality of pipeline, volume of pipeline all continue to be very solid. And that is across regions and it is
across sectors. And I think that the phenomenon that I was just describing in answer to Jon's question is an exceptionally horizontal one,
people just moving to these new cloud-first hybrid IT architectures and I think seeing the relevance of Equinix in that.
And so are there customer segments or types that are having more challenge? We get that question a lot. I do think that we're less
exposed to either start-ups or small company. That's typically not our sweet spot of our business. We're really more on enterprise level,
both service provider and enterprise architectures and how people are rethinking those globally. And so we continue to see a strong level
of demand. And so I think we're less exposed to that perhaps than maybe public cloud providers and others that small or start-up-type
businesses that might be impacted.
In terms of power and Europe, generally, I would say our European business is performing very well. And yes, we do expect that power is
going to -- and again, it hasn't yet impacted the -- we haven't rolled those through. One, a couple of comments on that. One, our history
is that we've rolled pricing through in interconnection. In fact, if you look at the nonfinancial metrics, we've increased MRR per cab in
Europe $100 over the last 4 quarters. And that's driven by interconnection pricing. That's driven by mix of business, et cetera. But the
European business is performing very well.
I do think it will create a pinch for people that they're going to have to pay more for power. But just to put that into context, we think that
a lot of our customers are going to see monthly increases that are really modest, depending on how concentrated they are in highly
impacted markets. But we think that even in worst cases where people are in a high-impact market, they might be impacted by, call it,
15% to 20% of their monthly bill. And so for most people, we don't believe that is something that will impact their overall commitment to
their digital transformation. But it does create -- and we think -- so we think that we're going to be able to continue to sustain the
demand levels that we're seeing.
And then the last piece on margin, again, we're -- kind of what we would expect, we were actually slightly ahead in Q3 of where our
expectations would have been. And Singapore is actually slightly better than what we expected for the full year. But thankfully, that's
sort of coming to an end. This is the last quarter where we'll see that. I think we'll be able to now make the adjustments that we needed
to make in terms of passing through the appropriate price increases in full in the markets impacted beginning in 2023.
As I said, I think we're going to be able to do that in a way that customers, even though they're certainly not going to applaud those price
increases, I think as they look at it, in a lot of those markets, they're feeling it as consumers, and they're feeling it at a very acute level.
And I think they're going to realize -- they're starting to realize what I think the benefits of our hedging programs are in terms of
dampening that volatility for them.
 
Keith D. Taylor
Equinix, Inc. - CFO
And so let me just add a couple of other quick points, if I may, just in addition to what Charles said. First and foremost, the objective to
get to 50% margin targets, as sort of Charles alluded to, we're doing better than we anticipated in the Americas. Singapore is better than
anticipated. And overall, we're running the business with a great deal of discipline. And I say that with emphasis.
And so number one, we're seeing a margin profile that's better than you might have otherwise anticipated. Two, when you sort of look
into the fourth quarter, we're making some discretionary decisions to accelerate costs into the fourth quarter. But absent that, we
continue to drive the business with great efficiency.
As it relates to the 50% EBITDA margin target, just -- I've said this on a number of -- in a number of non-deal road shows and
one-on-one discussions with investors, we're not shifting our emphasis to 50% EBITDA. We believe that we can get there. In fact, the
performance of the business post the Analyst Day, we're actually doing better than we anticipated at that point in time. But you've got a
very volatile and fractious market. And so we've got to deal with the consequences there. But if you look at it from a value on a per share
basis, we're as good, if not better, than we told you we're going to be in. So I think that's really important.
And then the last thing I just want to leave you with is sort of an adjunct to what -- again, what Charles said. The whole dialogue around
small customers, I mean, part of the reason that we disclosed in our prepared remarks the amount of transactions we did is to give you a
sense of just the volume of activity. And so we did 4,200 transactions again with 3,000 customers.
As we said last quarter, our pipeline is as strong as it's ever been. And in fact, I said it was healthy this quarter. It's actually -- our pipeline
is bigger this quarter than it was last quarter. And so we're really optimistic about the business and where we position ourselves. And we
continue to drive value into the overall equation. And again, we're long term focused. We want to drive value into the investor, and we're
very much focused on AFFO per share.
 
Operator
Our next question is from Michael Rollins from Citi.
 
Michael Ian Rollins
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - MD & U.S. Telecoms Analyst
First, on the stabilized constant currency revenue growth of 7% year-over-year, can you unpack that in terms of what was driving the
strength between whether it was utilization, just overall pricing, interconnection, et cetera?
And then second topic is on capital allocation and just curious in the wake of higher rates if you're considering any changes to the pace
and breadth of the development strategy. And as the AFFO dollars are approaching the combination of nonrecurring CapEx and the cash
dividends, what does Equinix want to do with the balance sheet flexibility that you were describing earlier in the call?
 
Charles J. Meyers
Equinix, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Yes. I'll let Mike -- I mean, I'll let Keith take the second part of that, Mike. And then let me talk a little bit about stabilized assets, and he
can talk to you a little bit more on the balance sheet side and rates, et cetera. But the -- look, yes, it was a tremendous quarter, obviously,
on stabilized assets. 7% is particularly strong. There is still a little bit of juice in there on the Singapore piece, but it's definitely even
without that significantly above kind of where we've been trending. And I think it's kind of a combination of all of those factors that you're
seeing, pricing, interconnection, utilization, power density, all of those things probably really playing in. So -- and I think you're starting
to now see the beginnings of seeing price actions.
Now you're not seeing the PPIs, the power price increases, because those will roll through in '23. But as we've talked about, we've already
adjusted list pricing on a number of our products. You're starting to see that roll through in renewals, and you're seeing it on other
products around interconnection, et cetera. And so I think you're starting to see that.
As you saw, broadly speaking, utilization is trending up nicely. In fact, if you look over the last 4 quarters, EMEA and APAC are both up
5%. And so Europe is down about 2%, but a lot of capacity added in that region, right? And so I think we're continuing to get more out of
the assets that we've deployed, continuing to feel very good about the pricing environment, continuing to dense people up, driving good
commercial decisions. And I think that's really showing up in the stabilized assets. We also had a couple of retired assets that -- in there.
They're probably also of further help.
And then the last piece I would say is churn continues to trend favorably. We haven't talked a lot about that. But boy, I think we've always
said, look, the right -- get the right customer, right application, right asset, that's the way to drive churn down. And I think we've seen
that effect over the last many quarters and continue to feel really good about that. We had obviously elevated levels of churn in the
Verizon assets, which I think was really impacting our stabilized asset performance for a period of time and have now really come
through the back end of that really nicely. And I think feel really good about -- candidly, I'm like I'm not sure that, that current level is --
that's a little above the range that we typically guided you guys to. But we'll certainly take it and are pleased with the performance.
 
Keith D. Taylor
Equinix, Inc. - CFO
And Michael, just going to the -- and maybe just a couple of things. One of the things that you probably noted in our same-store
reporting in the earnings deck is you can see that a lot of the value on a stabilized basis is coming from colocation and interconnection. In
fact, interconnection on a stabilized basis is up 10% year-over-year on a constant currency basis, whereas colocation is up 7%. It's being
diluted a little bit by the other services, which is only up 5%. And then nonrecurring is down quarter-over-quarter largely because of the
one-off nonrecurring fees that we get from the xScale business. But overall, you're seeing just strong -- just to validate what -- all that
Charles said, it's just you can see it in that slide just perfectly.
As it relates to the balance sheet, if you wouldn't mind, I would like you to reframe the question just one last time. I want to make sure we
get it right and respond to it. So could you just ask that question again on where we are vis-à-vis our capital allocation?
 
Michael Ian Rollins
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - MD & U.S. Telecoms Analyst
Yes. And it was 2 parts. First, if you're considering any changes to the pace and breadth of your development strategy in the wake of
higher rates. And then as the AFFO dollars are approaching the combination of the nonrecurring CapEx and the cash dividend, what do
you want to do with the flexibility on the balance sheet that you were describing earlier in the call?
 
Keith D. Taylor
Equinix, Inc. - CFO
Yes. So thank you on that. So first and foremost, I think we fancy ourselves as pretty darn good capital allocators. We -- obviously, we
want to invest in -- and the highest returning investment we can make is in the organic business, and we're going to continue to focus on
that. No surprise this quarter, we have 46 projects currently underway across 31 markets in 21 countries.
And so we remain very active, and we want to continue to grow and expand the business horizontally while at the same time investing
quite openly on the vertical side of the investment, which is the digital services. So you're going to see a combination of the 2. And as we
look into 2023, we'll give you more guide on that. But suffice it to say that we -- there is an appetite to continue to invest in the business.
And we really get to enjoy the cash flows we generate in the business and the low payout ratio to basically self-fund that for all intents
and purposes. So I feel exceedingly good about that.
As you look forward then, again, we are carrying a little bit of excess cash right now. We saw an opportunity in the market -- in the
quarter, pardon me, to pull down a little bit of our ATM. And so we settled some stuff that we did in Q2 this quarter. And then we also --
we sold some in the quarter in and of itself at -- I think the average was $697 a share.
And so we chose to do that because we knew we're going into a period of volatility. And we wanted to make sure that we could fully
affect the use of our cash flow and invest in the long-term growth of the business, which is really on the expansion capital while also
investing in digital services. So that's what you're going to continue to hear us talk about.
And then we're also being very judicious about -- I've spoken quite openly about we want to raise more debt even in the current
environment. But the question is, where do we source that debt from? And can we take advantage of different markets around the world
based on prevailing cost to borrow? And so you'll hear more about that. But suffice it to say, I think you'll see more debt activity over the
coming quarters than otherwise you'd see with ATM.
And then just as it relates to investment in capital, yes, I know the cost of capital is moving up. But we -- the benefit of our model is, and
for all the reasons you just heard Charles speak about, we get a really good return on our assets. Our stabilized assets are getting 29%
on them and -- on the gross PP&E invested. So any time we increment that, knowing that we're keeping our costs well in check here, that
you're going to get a nice incremental return. And so from our perspective, we're not arbitraging over our cost of capital. We're driving
real value into the business for our customers and for the future.
And as a result, we want to continue to make that investment, and we'll be very wise about what we raised in the form of capital to fund
our growth, knowing that you've got a dividend that's growing, and you've got a business that's growing. And as a result, we've got to
fund not only the business and also the capital redeployment back to the investor. So I think it's a great question you're asking. We spend
a lot of energy on it. I've got a fantastic treasury team that work underneath us, and we're looking at all ways to source our capital and
fund value on a per share basis to the business. And so stay tuned.
 
Charles J. Meyers
Equinix, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Mike, the -- you guys are pushing a lot of the buttons here. So I want to offer an anecdote that I think is really powerful. And that is kind
of when I'm out and talking to customers and with sales teams, it's pretty amazing because what I hear from sales teams, their #1
concern, not enough capacity. They're like, "We're worried we're going to run out of capacity. We need to -- are you building more
capacity?" I'm not hearing, "Hey, what are you going to do to my quotas next year?" We know the answer to that question. I'm not
hearing, "Hey, passing through these power increases is challenging." What I'm hearing is, "We need more capacity. We need to continue
to invest in the business. When are we going to get more coverage on digital services? I want to cover more markets. We need to respond
to our customers' needs."
And so I think it's just a reflection. We're pushing utilization up. That's starting to create some pinch points. And so from our perspective,
as we look at how the business is performing, continue to invest in inorganic growth prudently and appropriately and always in -- with a
keen eye on the macro environment is still best and -- highest and best use for us.
 
Operator
Our next question is from David Barden from Bank of America.
 
Unidentified Analyst
This is [Alex] on for Dave. Just, Charles, maybe just on those comments that you just made in terms of building out more capacity, are you
seeing any issues just similar to what's going on in Northern Virginia and other areas of the world of power transmission issues or power
procurement issues?
 
Charles J. Meyers
Equinix, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Yes. It's a great question. The answer is yes. I mean, I think you're seeing that markets around the world are thinking about how to
allocate energy. They're also thinking about the sustainability impacts of data centers in their markets and how they want to sort of --
how they want to think about providing energy and permitting to support those, et cetera. So obviously, that's a key area of focus for us.
I do think that overall, we're in a very good position. I think that not only do we have really well-established relationships across those
markets, we have a level of commitment and, I think, sophistication on the sustainability side that people, I think, feel comfortable that
we are going to make the commitments necessary to support digital transformation in their markets and digital growth in their markets
in a way that's responsible. And so I think that's going to continue to be a differentiation for us.
But we -- and the other thing is, is that our business and our business model are very different when it comes to power. They need to
support, for example, a hyperscale facility that's going to support 1 or 2 customers, and allocating that power entirely to those is very
different than the power situation we find ourselves in. We have a much greater level of flexibility in terms of looking at how we're using
power, moving the power around over time. And so I think there's some additional flexibility for us there.
But short answer is, yes, that is a dynamic that I think is not unique to Northern Virginia. We feel very good about where we are in that
market, by the way, just in terms of our position there. But it is something that I think is going to be on people's minds.
And I think we're -- on the capacity question, we're even seeing that churn -- people who were planning to churn are now unplanning it.
And because I think they feel like they -- ensuring that they have capacity and sometimes under existing terms or something that is close
to those existing terms is a strategic decision for them. And I think we're continuing to see favorability in churn for those reasons.
 
Unidentified Analyst
Perfect. And then maybe if I could just ask one more. Just you completed Entel, and then you announced a smaller deal in Latin America.
Could you just kind of walk us through the Latin America strategy and where you kind of see that business going?
 
Charles J. Meyers
Equinix, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Sure. Generally, I would say that we feel like that the Chile addition with Entel was a strategic one that sort of fills out the Lat Am
portfolio in a really powerful way. And so I think we feel good about the level of coverage that we have there. That's not to say there
wouldn't be potentially incremental opportunities there. But our businesses in Brazil -- our business in Brazil continues to thrive.
Obviously, current -- market -- currency-wise, it can be challenging and has been for years, but the growth there has been really strong.
And our differentiated position in that market continues to be very good. So I think that we continue to invest in that business.
We're happy with the early returns on our business in Mexico. As Keith said, we've made some investments there for land and continue to
see that as a -- with additional market opportunity there, excited about the early returns there. And that's one of the things we see on
these businesses. We underwrite them to a certain level of performance. And almost always, we're seeing that the power of bringing
those assets into our channel, our channel broadly speaking mean our direct teams and our partners, and giving them access to those,
we're really typically hitting bookings velocities that are much better than what we underwrote to. And so we feel good about that.
But yes, I think we feel good about Lat Am. I think there's potentially incremental opportunity. But if I were to prioritize where I think we
were more likely to make incremental M&A activity, it would be in probably maybe some other parts of the world, and we've talked about
those in a variety of places. Southeast Asia, I think that is continuing to reshape a bit and is a market that both organically and
potentially through M&A, we would find attractive. India is a market that I think we will continue to invest in organically and potentially
inorganically. And obviously, we've got a starting point in Africa that we are very excited about, but there's more potentially to do there.
So I think that's -- I kind of went a little beyond your question there, but that's a little bit of a frame on the M&A world.
 
Operator
Next question is from Aryeh Klein from BMO Capital Market.
 
Aryeh Klein
BMO Capital Markets Equity Research - United States Real Estate Analyst
Maybe following up on churn, it's been low for a while here. As we move into potentially tougher macro and you ask customers to absorb
kind of the full brunt of the price increases, is that something that you would expect to tick up?
 
Charles J. Meyers
Equinix, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
No. So I mean, we really don't see that. And I think that we've seen -- one, I think the history of our business, and this is pretty empirically
validated, is that our demand tends to be pretty inelastic. And so -- and I think that's likely to be particularly true relative to the power
price increases, which I believe and hope will be at least to some degree transitory. Now whether or not we get back to energy level --
pricing levels that we were at before, I don't know. But I think that I don't -- we don't currently see that as a driver for people to say, "Oh
well, we're going to churn out of our capacity."
So I think it increases the level of focus that people have on efficient utilization of the capacity they have deployed. And I think that you
see that same dynamic a little bit in cloud, right, which is people are saying, "Hey, we've got to tighten up on our cloud bills. We're going
to reduce usage on non-mission-critical workloads." And I think you're seeing some of that impact in that business.
Our business is much more on fixed contracts. We're starting -- we have a little bit of usage-based revenue in some of our digital services,
but I don't foresee us ticking up in churn in any meaningful way as a result of sort of the pricing adjustments. I think that we're going to
continue to see people very committed to their digital transformation. I think like -- that will be an element of inflationary forces that our
customers are going to deal with, much like we and every other company is dealing with out there. But I think it boils down to kind of how
you -- what priorities you place, and we really feel like digital transformation and the move to hybrid and multi-cloud is, as we said in the
script, both a revenue maximizing driver and a cost driver in many cases in terms of doing more with less.
So we feel like the demand profile is going to continue to be strong. And again, our ability to forecast churn has been very, very good.
And so we're not going into that blind. We continue to have confidence there. But we'll have to continue to monitor it very, very closely
and see how the market responds. But I think our history and empirical data would indicate that we have a market that's pretty inelastic
from a demand perspective.
 
Aryeh Klein
BMO Capital Markets Equity Research - United States Real Estate Analyst
And then, Keith, I think you mentioned some of the timing related to some spending during the quarter. Looking at Q4, the margin for
the quarter towards the -- lower than they've been in a long time, the implied margin. How should we think about the spending in the
fourth quarter and how that maybe carries into 2023?
 
Keith D. Taylor
Equinix, Inc. - CFO
Well, yes, as I said in the prepared remarks, there's an element of discretionary spend that we accelerated in the quarter and think of that
in the $20 million to $30 million range. And then you've got a pretty large range in the quarterly guide. So I would say like look at the
underlying performance. You've got some seasonal costs, too, that sort of take place in the fourth quarter that we absorb. But overall, the
business continues to perform better than we anticipated. The margin profile or the cash that's generated in the business is stronger
than we are planning. And as a result, we use that as an opportunity to accelerate cost and put us in a pretty good spot as we start to
think about 2023.
 
Charles J. Meyers
Equinix, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Yes. Just to give you a little more transparency on some -- what some of those are. We're pulling forward some R&M, pulling forward --
just finishing out some projects that we are focused on, both on the go-to-market side and on the product side to really give us that
momentum going into next year. We gave a little bit more -- a little wider berth to the teams on T&E in Q4 because we really continue to
believe that getting our teams reconnected both to our customers and to each other is important. And I think we're really seeing the
dividends of that.
And so -- but we definitely have not lost the plot in terms of our focus on operating leverage. In fact, if you look at our SG&A line, it's flat
quarter-to-quarter, and that's in the face of increasing investment in sales and marketing. And so that implies that we're sort of
tightening down on G&A. And even though we're adding head count in very targeted areas to support a very healthy organic performance
of our business, we're also really tightening down in areas of the business in recognizing that we continue -- have to continue to have a
focus on automation and simplification and efficiency. And we got to get that G&A leverage that we need in the business over time.
So we're trying to make good, balanced decisions on that front. And again, we'll give you more perspective on kind of what that means,
but feeling very good about the trajectory of the business as we exit towards the end of the year.
 
Operator
The next question is from Sami Badri from Credit Suisse.
 
Ahmed Sami Badri
Crédit Suisse AG, Research Division - Senior Analyst
Keith, earlier, you said that you have been having conversations with your customers regarding those PIs. And you said that you have
been sharing with them some ranges. I was hoping you could kind of share with us what those ranges actually are, just so we can have an
idea of magnitude when we enter 2023.
And then I think there was a question about general activity and trends and apologize if this is a duplicative question. But the tech sector
is reporting some elongated lead times and some sales cycles extending. To a certain degree, there are even IT budgets that require
Board-level approvals, which are just slowing some things down. I was hoping you could tell us if that -- those are the things that you're
seeing or not at this stage. And then I have one follow-up.
 
Keith D. Taylor
Equinix, Inc. - CFO
Okay. Well, let me maybe just start with the ranges. So first and foremost, we wanted to have -- our go-to-market engine, the
customer-facing teams, wanted to have some dialogue with the customers on sort of the power increases. And so then first of all, it was
really -- everybody is seeing what's going on in the broader market, particularly in Europe. And as a result, making sure that you're sort of
advising the customers that there is going to be, in fact, a power increase at some point.
The second volley was effectively, look, depending on where you are, one market is very, very different than another market. Some are
regulated, some are unregulated. This is the sort of the range that you should expect. As both Charles and I have mentioned, we've got a
sophisticated hedging program. We basically solidified what we think is a good portion of exposure for next year. And so we have specific
information on that. And so we give them a range of what that could be. And again, it's market-specific. It's volume-specific. It's
application-specific. Again, customers -- there's going to be a wide range for these customers, depending on where they operate.
And the third volley will be in the not-too-distant future, here is your specific increase. And so part of it is just making sure that the
customer is fully understood, that we're communicating with them. And we got it with -- and we give them enough time to understand
what was going to happen, particularly if they -- as they start to think about their 2023 planning cycle. And so that was -- that's the first
part.
To give you something specific about what -- look, I could tell you, in some markets, if you look at spot, you're talking about multiples of
increase, particularly in the U.K. market. That's not where we are as a company. We've done a very good job of buying forward and
making sure we have a good position with. And I think our customers, as we said, we think will be in a better spot relative to our
competition and will be certainly well below what I think prevailing market rates are. So that's the positive. That is a European
discussion.
As you look at Asia and Americas, it's a different dialogue. You've got a much more structured increase. And overall, I feel very good
about that. I think one of the things that you should walk away, though, is understanding that this company is almost wholly hedged for
next year. And certainly, Europe is even more hedged than the broader company. And so that's the one thing, I think, is really worth
noting here. Because last year, we had some exposure to Singapore. We feel much better where we are going into '23 on Singapore.
As we said, the market -- we would go -- come back to the market, and the market would come to us. And all indications is the market is
coming to us. And as a result, we'll pass through those incremental costs as well. So hopefully, that helps you a little bit, Sami. But I can't
give you a specific range. It's very -- it's market- and customer-specific.
 
Charles J. Meyers
Equinix, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
We will give -- I mean, obviously, we'll give -- as those tighten up and as we get -- as we go into the call in February, we'll give you a lot
more transparency there.
 
Keith D. Taylor
Equinix, Inc. - CFO
Yes. And Sami, what was the second question? I think it was going to go to Charles on that one.
 
Charles J. Meyers
Equinix, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Yes. It was around the general trends and extended cycles and are we seeing tighter IT budgets and those kind of things. Look, as I said,
what we're seeing is generally a substantial commitment to the digital transformation agenda. And that doesn't mean people aren't
seeing the need to tighten their belt on IT in other ways. But typically, we see that they are not -- they are trying very hard not to sort of
distract their agenda in terms of the move to hybrid or to multi-cloud as their architecture of choice.
And I was just reading something from Gartner the other day in terms of just looking at how important is a particular IT project to your
sort of digital agenda. And what is it going to do to impact your competitiveness, to drive top line growth, to save money, et cetera? And
we continue to see a vigorous commitment to those kinds of things. And so -- and we have, generally, and Keith talked about this, both in
terms of our cycle s-sales cycle and our backlog, have not seen extensions of either of those things.
And so sales execution has continued to be very, very good. Pipeline continues to be strong. Pipeline execution and conversion continues
to be strong. And so we're not saying it doesn't exist, although we're -- but what we would say is that the demand profile and how it's
translating for us in bookings and pipeline is very, very good. And we're continuing to invest in the business accordingly.
 
Ahmed Sami Badri
Crédit Suisse AG, Research Division - Senior Analyst
Got it. My last question is more on bare metal, and you mentioned how you have a new SaaS customer coming on using the service, and
you also have a health care enterprise or customer using this service. And one of your private data center peers recently introduced a
metal service and product. So I kind of want to just understand what's the vision here for Equinix and the metal solution overall. Like are
you guys trying to grow this 2, 3x? Is this going to become a much more integrated or interconnected piece to everything you do? I just
want to understand what the kind of the pipeline or the road map is there.
 
Charles J. Meyers
Equinix, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Sure. Well, definitely, I think, it can be 2 to 3x and more than that than its current size, for sure. I think it can be -- so we definitely believe
it's a meaningful business going forward for us. I also think we want to see it be more fully integrated. In fact, I think that is feedback
we're getting from our customers is, "We love your individual digital services, but they don't work as effectively as an integrated platform
as we would like." And so Scott Crenshaw, who joined us, is sort of out there talking to customers, hearing what's on their mind. That has
been a topic. And we're really continuing to align our product and development agenda to ensure that we're addressing the needs that
the customers have.
And so we do believe that an integrated platform, if you look at network edge, fabric and metal, we think that's a compelling
combination of offerings for customers as they look to implement digital transformation strategies in hybrid and multi-cloud. And so --
but I think it's important that we really continue to view that as giving them the right sort of portfolio of services to meet their needs. We
think that actually, public cloud will be a great home for a significant portion of their workloads.
We definitely see sometimes repatriation back to either a colo-based solution or a metal type-based solution that allows sort of different
level of economic scaling, and utilization is something that happens. But we want to respond to the needs of the customer and to have
the right solution for them. And so when that's cloud, that's great. Move the workloads to the cloud, we'll give you the connectivity you
need to connect it to the data and other applications you need to have it perform well. And we'll distribute that infrastructure around the
world.
And so I think us being able to go in with that trusted adviser status with the customer is really what's driving the business. But we
definitely see a big opportunity in metal and I think -- and with the broader digital services portfolio has continued. And as we've said in
the past, it's growing at a multiple of the rate of our -- of the broader business.
 
Operator
And our last question today is from Matt Niknam from Deutsche Bank.
 
Matthew Niknam
Deutsche Bank AG, Research Division - Director
And I'll keep it to one because I know we're over the hour. You're tracking a 9% to 10% -- not a problem. So I know you're tracking a 9% to
10% constant currency growth on AFFO per share this year. But there's obviously headwinds from rising interest rates and higher power
costs. And I know you've mentioned you intend to pass those through. But the question is really what confidence level do you have in the
ability to stay within that 7% to 10% AFFO per share growth range for next year with the number of headwinds out there?
 
Charles J. Meyers
Equinix, Inc. - President, CEO & Director
Sure. Clearly, we're not going to give you a sort of a guide for next year, and we'll give you that early. I guess I'd sort of reposition the
question to simply tell you that if you look at our performance of what we said we would do at the Analyst Day and what we've now done,
I think we continue to feel really good about the trajectory of the business. Top line growth is strong, stronger than outside of the bounds
of what we had said. I think that -- and I think that's really on the strength of underlying business momentum. And we feel really good
about the trajectory going into next year from a top line growth standpoint, too.
I think growth will be a little wind assisted on PPIs next year, but I think we'll give you clear transparency on what that is. But I think it's
going to be on top of really strong underlying momentum in the business. And we think that's translating into the AFFO per share sort of
growth that we think is needed and attractive. And then you combine that with a healthy dividend yield, and we think it's a great story.
So just generally, I would say, we feel good about the momentum. Top line growth is good. We're going to continue to focus on operating
leverage. And we think, therefore, we're going to be able to deliver strong performance on an AFFO per share basis. Keith, anything to
add there?
 
Keith D. Taylor
Equinix, Inc. - CFO
And Matt, the only other thing I would say is one of the things that -- again, you talked about normalized constant currency. And so on a
constant currency basis, we're taking roughly, relative to where we started the year, about $180 million hit to the top line because of
currency movement and about $85 million to the EBITDA line. So it gives you a sense that what we're absorbing. So the performance of
the business is doing much better than we had anticipated. And you can see that coming in so many different places, including the
Americas business.
I think when the -- I think the other thing that's going to certainly aid many of us, particularly those that are U.S.-domiciled, as currencies
start to move the other direction, which I suspect that they will at some point, that you're also going to get wind on your back from
currency. So not only do you have the momentum coming from what Charles alluded to, but I also think that you've got -- you're going to
have currency movement when -- where other sort of central banks move their rates up to the U.S. or the U.S. starts to slow down on
their rate increase. And that's going to be, I think, a real benefit to the business.
And as I said before, if you just take our top 3 currencies and you take them back to our traditional parity level, not a deviation higher or
lower, I mean, you're really talking about a significant increase in revenues just from currency movements. Now of course, we hedge
ourselves, and we do a really good job of currency hedging. But I want to leave you with that thought as well. It's not just about the pure
execution to the business on how we're operating it. But also, there's some currency movement that I think is going to benefit us as well.
 
Katrina Rymill
Equinix, Inc. - VP of IR
Thank you. That concludes our Q3 call. Thank you for joining us.
 
Operator
That concludes the conference. Thank you for participating. You may disconnect at this time.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
©2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.