CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
Bradley J. Dodson
Civeo Corporation - CEO, President & Director
 
Carolyn J. Stone
Civeo Corporation - Senior VP, CFO & Treasurer
 
Regan Nielsen
Civeo Corporation - Director of Corporate Development & IR
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
John Daniel
 
Stephen David Gengaro
Stifel, Nicolaus & Company, Incorporated, Research Division - MD & Senior Analyst
 
Stephen Michael Ferazani
Sidoti & Company, LLC - Research Analyst
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Greetings, and welcome to Civeo Corporation Third Quarter 2022 Earnings Call. (Operator Instructions) As a reminder, this conference is
being recorded. It is my pleasure to introduce your host, Regan Nielsen, Senior Director, Investor Relations. Thank you. Mr. Nielsen, you
may begin.
 
Regan Nielsen
Civeo Corporation - Director of Corporate Development & IR
Thank you, and welcome to Civeo's Third Quarter 2022 Earnings Conference Call. Today, our call will be led by Bradley Dodson, Civeo's
President and Chief Executive Officer; and Carolyn Stone, Civeo's Senior Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer.
Before we begin, we would like to caution listeners regarding forward-looking statements. To the extent that our remarks today contain
anything other than historical information, please note that we're relying on the safe harbor protections afforded by federal law. Any such
remarks should be read in the context of the many factors that affect our business, including risks and uncertainties disclosed in our
Forms 10-K, 10-Q and other SEC filings.
I'll now turn the call over to Bradley.
 
Bradley J. Dodson
Civeo Corporation - CEO, President & Director
Thank you, Regan, and thank you all for joining us today on our third quarter earnings call. I'll start with the key takeaways for the third
quarter and then give a brief summary of our third quarter 2022 performance, after which Carolyn will provide a financial and
segment-level review and I will conclude with our updated full year 2022 guidance and the regional assumptions underlying that
guidance. I will also provide preliminary comments regarding our 2023 outlook, and then we will open the call for questions.
Key takeaways from our call are we had strong third quarter and year-over-year revenues up 19% and adjusted EBITDA up 34%, driven by
increased activity across all 3 geographic segments. Our occupancy related to pipeline construction is expected to continue into 2023,
which will result in continued Canadian mobile camp activity through the end of 2022 and end of 2023. This development will push our
demobilization costs of those camps into 2023. The strong third quarter performance, coupled with the deferral of the Canadian mobile
camp demobilizations from 2022 into 2023, drove the increase to our full year guidance, which I will detail later in the call.
We generated $38.6 million of free cash flow in the quarter, which led to a significant milestone of us reducing our net leverage to below
1.0x. We're committed to investors that we would prioritize deleveraging, and this achievement would not have been possible without the
efforts of the entire Civeo team over the last few years. Our continued debt reduction provides us with flexibility to both weather the
current market volatility and further evaluate opportunities to deploy capital.
Lastly, after repurchasing approximately 715,000 shares since September 2021, including 475,000 shares in the third quarter of 2022,
we announced that our Board of Directors has renewed its share repurchase authorization for Civeo to repurchase up to 5% of its total
common shares outstanding over the next 12 months.
Let me take a moment to provide a business update across the 3 segments. In Canada, our revenues and adjusted EBITDA increased
year-over-year driven by an increase in lodge occupancy as well as increased Canadian mobile camp activity. We experienced a
sequential decrease in revenues and adjusted EBITDA due to typical seasonal wind-down in the third quarter of turnaround activity.
In Australia, our revenues and adjusted EBITDA were in line with our expectations, increasing year-over-year and sequentially. This was
primarily driven by increased year-over-year in sequential integrated services activity due to the recently announced contract awards
starting in the third quarter.
Increased occupancy in several Bowen Basin villages also contributed to a strong third quarter performance.
Turning briefly to the U.S. Revenues and adjusted EBITDA increased year-over-year due to increased activity, positively impacting our
wellsite and offshore businesses, partially offset by the sale of our West Permian lodge, which we did in the fourth quarter of last year.
In September, we sold our wellsite business. While the business was improving with increasing drilling activity in the U.S., where
unfortunately we're unable to create scale in the business despite the sales and service efforts of our team.
And with that, I'll turn it over to Carolyn.
 
Carolyn J. Stone
Civeo Corporation - Senior VP, CFO & Treasurer
Thank you, Bradley, and thank you all for joining us this morning. Today, we reported total revenues in the third quarter of $184.2 million
with GAAP net income of $5.2 million or $0.32 per diluted share. During the third quarter, we generated adjusted EBITDA of $35 million,
operating cash flow of $38.7 million and free cash flow of $38.6 million. As Bradley just mentioned, the increased adjusted EBITDA that
we experienced in the third quarter of 2022 as compared to the same period last year was largely due to increased billed rooms in our
Canadian lodges and increased Canadian mobile camp activity, coupled with increased Australian village billed rooms and integrated
services activity. The quarter-over-quarter increase in operating cash flow and free cash flow was primarily due to these same factors.
Let's now turn to the third quarter results for our 3 segments. I'll begin with a review of the Canadian segment performance compared to
its performance a year ago in the third quarter of 2021. Revenues from our Canadian segment were $103 million as compared to
revenues of $84.1 million in the third quarter of '21. Adjusted EBITDA in Canada was $25.6 million, an increase from $19.8 million in the
third quarter of last year. Results from the third quarter of 2022 reflects the impact of a weakened Canadian dollar relative to the U.S.
dollar, which decreased revenues and adjusted EBITDA by $3.7 million and $0.9 million, respectively. On a constant currency basis, the
increase in both revenues and adjusted EBITDA was largely driven by a 19% year-over-year increase in billed rooms related to the
recovery in oil prices and increased turnaround activity, coupled with increased mobile camp activity.
During the third quarter, build rooms in our Canadian lodges totaled 731,000, which were up 19% year-over-year from 613,000 in the
third quarter of 2021 due to the factors I just discussed. Our daily run rate for the Canadian segment in U.S. dollars was $99, which is
relatively flat year-over-year, largely due to a weakened Canadian dollar relative to the U.S. dollar.
Turning to Australia. During the third quarter, we reported revenues of $73.8 million, up from $65.1 million in the third quarter of 2021.
Adjusted EBITDA was $16.9 million, up from $14.8 million last year. Results from the third quarter of 2022 reflects the impact of a
weakened Australian dollar relative to the U.S. dollar, which decreased revenue and adjusted EBITDA by $5.5 million and $1.3 million,
respectively. On a constant currency basis, the increased results were driven by both increased billed rooms in our villages and increased
integrated services activity.
Australian billed rooms in the quarter were $525,000, up 7% from $491,000 in the third quarter of last year, due again to the recovery of
customer maintenance activity in our villages resulting from a more muted impact of the China-Australia trade dispute. While the
average daily rate for our Australian villages in U.S. dollars was $73 in the third quarter, down from $78 in the third quarter of 2021, the
decrease was entirely driven by the weakened Australian dollar.
Moving to the U.S. Revenues for the third quarter were $7.4 million as compared to $5.9 million in the third quarter of 2021. The U.S.
segment adjusted EBITDA was a loss of $33,000 in the third quarter, up from the loss of $544,000 during the same period last year. The
increase in adjusted EBITDA was primarily due to increased activity positively impacting our wellsite services and offshore businesses.
Offset by the impact of the sale of the West Permian Lodge in the fourth quarter of '21.
On a consolidated basis, capital expenditures for the third quarter of 2022 were $8.8 million compared to $3.4 million during the same
period in 2021. Capital expenditures in both periods were predominantly related to maintenance spending on our lodges and villages.
Our total debt outstanding on September 30, 2022, was $126.2 million, which is a $28.4 million decrease since June 30. The decrease
consisted of $19.5 million in debt payments from cash flow generated by the business and favorable foreign currency translation of $8.9
million. And our net leverage ratio for the quarter decreased to 0.9x as of September 30 from 1.2x as of June 30. As of September 30, we
had total liquidity of approximately $117.3 million, which consists of $108.9 million available under our revolving credit facilities and $8.4
million of cash on hand.
Bradley will now discuss our updated guidance for the full year 2022 and preliminary comments on our 2023 outlook. Bradley?
 
Bradley J. Dodson
Civeo Corporation - CEO, President & Director
Thank you, Carolyn. I'd like to discuss our updated full year 2022 guidance on a consolidated basis, including the underlying outlook for
each of the segments as well as the underlying assumptions related to the guidance. I'll provide a few preliminary comments regarding
our 2023 outlook.
Based on our third quarter results and the deferral of the majority of our Canadian mobile camp utilization costs ended 2023, we are
raising our full year 2022 revenue and EBITDA guidance to $675 million to $685 million revenues and $110 million to $115 million of
adjusted EBITDA. We are maintaining our full year 2022 capital expenditure guidance, which is $24 million to $29 million. Based on this
EBITDA and CapEx guidance, we expected interest expense of $10 million to 2022 and minimal expense [of cash taxes]. We expect our
2022 free cash flow forecast is expected to be in the range of $71 million to $81 million. The increase to our revenue and EBITDA
guidance is primarily driven by the deferral of our mobile camp demobilization costs into 2023.
Our Canadian mobile camp activity is primarily related to the construction of the Coastal GasLink and other pipelines. This pipeline
construction is now expected to continue into 2023 and should require the use of our mobile camps supporting that project. Construction
of this pipeline is nearing completion, so we expect to see a reduction in our occupancy and profitability related to mobile camps as this
activity winds down into 2023, and we recognize the majority of the expected demobilization cost next year.
I will provide the regional outlooks, guidance on the regional outlooks and corresponding assumptions. In Canada, as we look to the
remainder of 2022, we are expecting to experience a decrease in billed rooms due to turnaround activity winding down, coupled with
typical holiday downtime. We are also experiencing inflationary pressures on our utility costs, which will be exacerbated by winter
weather.
Turning to Australia. We continue to see encouraging signs of improvement in customer demand for our integrated services activity and
as well as our village business. The fourth quarter of 2022 will also be burdened by the typical fourth quarter seasonality that will
negatively impact our village occupancy.
Iron ore prices remain at constructive levels, and customer activity in Western Australia remains strong. While we are seeing gradual
progress as it pertains to COVID-19-related labor issues that we've experienced in the last 2 years, it's a slow process, and we expect
leverage mortgages to remain a factor for the remainder of this year and into next.
I'll now move to the 2023 outlook, and I'll provide some preliminary comments. Customer spending, specifically customer capital
spending, drives our occupancy at our Canadian lodges and our Australian villages. While commodity prices for oil, natural gas, met coal
and iron ore continue to be constructive, our customers continue to be focused on cash flow generation, capital discipline and returning
capital to shareholders. So as a result, at this point, we do not see a material increase in occupancy in 2023 for either the Canadian
lodges or the Australian villages.
In Canada, we are expecting relatively flat occupancy in our Canadian lodges, perhaps with some modest upside. As we've discussed on
previous calls, we expect our Canadian mobile camp activity to significantly decline as we meet our completion of the coastal gasoline
pipeline as well as others. This decline in mobile camp activity profitability will be exacerbated by the recognition of demobilization costs
in 2023.
In Australia, we're expecting a modest increase in occupancy in our villages due to customer expansionary activity. We're also expecting
an increase in Australia integrated services business due to some internal contracts the team has won. However, we are expecting
margin compression due to labor shortages and fed inflation. While this has improved over several quarters, we're expecting only a
gradual improvement in 2023.
Given the significant progress that we've made in reducing our total leverage, we expect capital allocation going forward to focus on
opportunistically repurchasing our stock under our authorized buyback plan and weighing those returns against the expected returns on
growth opportunities, both organic and inorganic.
With that, I'll conclude our prepared remarks by underscoring the key elements of our strategy as we navigate this market climate. Our
mandate remains as follows. We will prioritize the safety and wellbeing of our guests, employees and communities. We'll manage our
cost structure in accordance with our outlook across all 3 segments. We will continue to enhance our best-in-class hospitality offerings.
We'll allocate capital prudently. We will seek opportunities to further our revenue diversification and free cash flow generation through
organic growth and M&A opportunities that have a superior anticipated return.
With that, we're happy to take your questions.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) Our first question comes from Stephen Gengaro with Stifel.
 
Stephen David Gengaro
Stifel, Nicolaus & Company, Incorporated, Research Division - MD & Senior Analyst
So a couple of things from me. I think the first would be around the fourth quarter. Like when we think about your revenue guidance, and
I know you mentioned some of the margin headwinds in the fourth quarter, but if you look at the 2 segments, where do you see the
bigger kind of margin degradation in the fourth quarter because of seasonality?
 
Bradley J. Dodson
Civeo Corporation - CEO, President & Director
Canada. It will be in Canada. Right now, based on customer labor curves, it looks like we're going to have significant downturn in terms
of occupancy, both at the pipeline camps as well as at the lodges. So I would say based on guidance as well as we start getting into
winter and we'll start to see increased propane and diesel costs as we have to keep the lodges, so it will be a combination of both.
Australia, we'll see some holiday downtime, but it's much more muted. So...
 
Stephen David Gengaro
Stifel, Nicolaus & Company, Incorporated, Research Division - MD & Senior Analyst
Got you. Great. And then you mentioned the demo cost. I mean if you had a crystal ball right now, which I know it's tough, would you see
that? Any sense for kind of when that occurs next year? Is it first quarter? Is it still too early to tell?
 
Bradley J. Dodson
Civeo Corporation - CEO, President & Director
Fortunately, Stephen, it's too early to tell. We -- I think we feel confident that all -- well, we moved -- since last quarter, we've moved to
be confident, although we kind of hinted that it would happen. The demo costs and activity would continue into 2023. But how long it
continues into 2023 is still very opaque, and so we'll look forward to giving hopefully some better guidance on our fourth quarter
earnings call as we get better insight from the customers.
 
Stephen David Gengaro
Stifel, Nicolaus & Company, Incorporated, Research Division - MD & Senior Analyst
Okay. Great. And then just one final one for me. And as I look back historically, I mean, you guys have always done a good job sort of
managing cost pressures, and I know we're in an unusual cost environment right now. Can you talk about both what you guys -- the
leverage you have to pull operationally and maybe the contractual discussions in terms that you have with customers to help offset that
impact?
 
Bradley J. Dodson
Civeo Corporation - CEO, President & Director
Sure. I would say that -- so I'll start with contractually. All of our multiyear contracts will have annual adjustments for inflation, but
they're annual, so there's going to be a lag. Historically, they have done an adequate job of managing an inflation. This is certainly a
atypical situation. So I would say we're probably losing 200 basis points on margin because of inflation, both labor and food costs. And
then in Canada, the power or utility costs are more exacerbated. But I think the team has done a good job so operationally, what we did.
So in Canada, as it relates to utility costs, we work on loading to the extent that we can ask customers to move their occupancy from one
location to another, so we can increase the loading on a given location and improved efficiencies there. We have and we'll do that.
On food costs, it's around managing to scope but looking for opportunities where we can change the exact food that we're offering,
specifically protein, to manage that cost.
On labor side, it's around managing shifts and making sure as efficient as we can be.
In Australia, I think the team has done a great job around trying to get labor. We're in a much better position now on a labor situation in
Australia than we were at the beginning of the year, but we're not back to where we want to be. We're trailing in terms of labor cost to
budget, but it's within a margin that I think is less than the inflationary pressures.
So on the food cost side, we've got to get better on procurement, and we're working on that.
So overall -- and you still have the same scope discussion that I mentioned on Canada. So I think in light of where we are from a global
economy standpoint, I think the team is doing a good job. It's just not -- it's not -- we could be doing better given where activity levels are,
absolutely inflation.
 
Operator
Next question comes from Steve Ferazani with Sidoti.
 
Stephen Michael Ferazani
Sidoti & Company, LLC - Research Analyst
I did want to follow up Stephen's question on the winding down of the mobile camps. And just do you have any ability to quantify how
quickly some of that revenue comes out? Just because when I'm thinking about your fourth quarter revenue guidance or sort of backing
into it, it's year-over-year down. Is that primarily on starting to see that decline in mobile camps? Or are there other pieces to that?
 
Bradley J. Dodson
Civeo Corporation - CEO, President & Director
It's some mobile camp activity, which is not really a wind-down, it's more holiday downtime issue as -- well, we have a partial demo but
one of the camps in the fourth quarter, which is contributing to it. But the biggest piece is just overall oil sands activity in the fourth
quarter, which as of right now, the labor curves look like it's going to be a pretty significant downturn in occupancy in oil sands region. I
think it's exacerbated by FX. So there's a little bit of that going on. But in terms of where the mobile camps land, in terms of occupancy
for next year, I wish I had a better answer, quite honestly.
 
Stephen Michael Ferazani
Sidoti & Company, LLC - Research Analyst
I understand.
 
Bradley J. Dodson
Civeo Corporation - CEO, President & Director
Yes. Right now, as close as we are for our customers, there's not a clear picture of how long those camps are going to be active. I think
the good news is, is that our team operationally and from a sales perspective, the customers have choices. The pipeline construction is
winding down. They can choose which cans to keep or demo. And I think the teams did a good job of operating and staying close to the
customer such that our camps are being chosen to continue into next year. So it's a win for us. But eventually, we're going to have to find
a replacement for those earnings. I'm hoping it's later in 2023, but we'll see.
 
Stephen Michael Ferazani
Sidoti & Company, LLC - Research Analyst
Okay. When you give your early look at Canadian expectations for 2023, not super positive or bullish. I'm just trying to think about the
fact that Trans Mountain comes online late 2023. Labor availability should be getting better. We're still not -- turnaround is still not back
to pre-COVID levels. There seem to be reasons. And I know day-to-day oil prices don't matter much, but certainly, the differential should
narrow next year. I mean there would seem to be a lot of reasons to be more bullish, but you're not.
 
Bradley J. Dodson
Civeo Corporation - CEO, President & Director
No. Well, I think what we need to see from here is what are the CapEx plans for the customers. We're kind of treading water the last
couple of years in terms of total Canadian CapEx. It also applies to Australia on the eastern side of the business. But CapEx is what's
going to drive our occupancy in both the Canadian lodges and the villages. So as we start to see CapEx plans by our customers come out,
we'll adjust accordingly. We've got a little bit of a tailwind in Australia because there are a couple of expansionary projects that are
driving incremental occupancy there. It's getting eaten up a little bit on, I would say, exacerbated inflation there. But overall, it's going to
be CapEx.
So I'd like to be more bullish and certainly say sitting here at high 80s oil prices and the other commodity prices that we would see more
activity. But again, it's customer discipline and returning [count] shareholders. They're enjoying higher commodity prices, and they're not
spending money that we would see historically. So until that changes, it's hard to say.
Now I think the good news is that we're largely supporting day-to-day operations. So we're not seeing the volatility as it relates to that. I
think the other piece, which I didn't mention earlier is we'll have to see how Canadian turnaround activity is next year. I think right now, I
believe, it will be relatively consistent with this year. So I would say that we're in Canada in terms of billed rooms, kind of flat with some
modest upside. In Australia, with the expansion projects, we've got some upside there. The team has done a good job on the integrated
services side in Australia of winning new work. And so we're cautiously optimistic that will continue. But again, that's a lower-margin
business. It's good work. We want to win it. And, it should add to the results.
 
Stephen Michael Ferazani
Sidoti & Company, LLC - Research Analyst
Great, great. And if I can get one more in terms of capital allocation, obviously, you've done a fantastic job with the balance sheet. You're
still generating an awful lot of cash flow, good problem to have. You're limited on the normal course issuer bid. I'm not an expert on
Canadian securities rules. But I mean you can couple in a substantial issuer bid, is that correct, if you wanted to, particularly with the
share conversion coming? Or what other possible uses for cash flow are you thinking about next year?
 
Bradley J. Dodson
Civeo Corporation - CEO, President & Director
So on capital allocation, we've gotten to a point around 1x levered. That's where we want to be. I think that gives us flexibility that when
(inaudible) opportunities to either opportunistically buy back stock, we will. We're going to be smart about it and then and weigh those
returns, expected returns against the growth projects that we have. And to your point, we're in a relatively strong commodity
environment should that continue, that it will present opportunities. And so we'll be very smart in terms of how we look at growth
opportunities and weigh those against buying back stock. And so that -- with a 1x lever, we can lever up a little bit for either 1 of those 2
opportunities. And then the shift will be back to paying down that debt. So that's the plan going forward.
 
Operator
Next question comes from John Daniel with Daniel Energy Partners.
 
John Daniel
Bradley, I got to -- might be a dumb question, and you guys can laugh at me after I hang up. And hopefully, you guys can hear me okay.
 
Bradley J. Dodson
Civeo Corporation - CEO, President & Director
Yes.
 
John Daniel
Okay. Good. I'm driving here. And so I drive a lot around the various basins. And back in the day, go back to, call it, 2011, 2012, whatever,
you couldn't find rooms in the Bakken, people are sleeping in Walmart. You go up there today, no trouble finding a room. And a lot of the
places you end up staying are kind of dumpy, at least where I stay perhaps.
But it would seem like, are there opportunities for opportunistic purchases of some of these places, albeit might be the hotels that you
could renovate and as a growth opportunity where maybe someone built something up in the hot times? It's now faded, and so perhaps
the better valuation could be had? Just a dumb question perhaps, but I'm curious on your thoughts.
 
Bradley J. Dodson
Civeo Corporation - CEO, President & Director
Well, I would say our lodge business in the U.S. had a couple of issues. One, others have built out and gotten scale, which has really been
our issue in the U.S. from -- for a while. When things are better a decade ago, we were focused on expanding our Canadian and
Australian business and the returns were better there. In the meantime, we missed out on the U.S. opportunities, and so we were left
with a portfolio of lodge locations that is tougher to compete against folks that have a better portfolio and can meet customer needs
across the basin as the activity shifts as you well know.
So I mean it's difficult for us in the U.S. to augment that because we're behind the April. So I would say our activity -- our occupancy,
specifically in the Bakken, has improved. We're running better in budget. And again, our lodge occupancy there is driven by completion
crews. So we've got a handful of those in our Killdeer location, and it's doing better than expected. But we just don't have the scale there,
and I expect that the returns opportunities elsewhere will continue to be better than us looking to build that up.
 
Operator
There are no further questions at this time. I would like to turn the floor back over to Bradley Dodson, CEO, for closing remarks.
 
Bradley J. Dodson
Civeo Corporation - CEO, President & Director
Thank you. And thank you, everyone, for joining the call today. We appreciate your interest in Civeo, and we look forward to speaking with
you on our fourth quarter earnings call in February.
 
Operator
This concludes today's teleconference. You may disconnect your lines at this time. Thank you for your participation.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
©2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.