CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
David A. Helfand
Equity Commonwealth - President, CEO & Trustee
 
David S. Weinberg
Equity Commonwealth - Executive VP & COO
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
Craig Allen Mailman
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Good morning, and thanks for joining this call to discuss Equity Commonwealth's results for the third quarter ending September 30,
2022, and an update on the company. (Operator Instructions) As a reminder, this conference is being recorded.
Please be advised that certain matters discussed during this conference call may constitute forward-looking statements within the
meaning of federal securities laws. Please refer to the section titled Forward-Looking Statements in the press release issued yesterday as
well as the section titled Risk Factors in the company's annual report on Form 10-K and quarterly reports on Form 10-Q for subsequent
quarters for a discussion of factors that could cause the company's actual results to materially differ from any forward-looking
statement.
The company assumes no obligation to update or supplement any forward-looking statements made today.
The company posts important information on its website at www.eqcre.com, including information that may be material.
The portion of today's remarks on the company's quarterly earnings also include certain non-GAAP financial measures. Please refer to
yesterday's press release and supplementals containing the company's results for a reconciliation of these non-GAAP measures to the
company's GAAP financial results.
On the call today are David Helfand, President and CEO; David Weinberg, COO; and Bill Griffiths, CFO.
And with that, I will turn the call over to David Helfand. Please go ahead, sir.
 
David A. Helfand
Equity Commonwealth - President, CEO & Trustee
Thank you. Thanks for joining us. This morning, I'll review the company's results for the quarter as well as provide a brief update on the
capital markets, our dispositions and investment activities.
Funds from operations were $0.13 per share compared to $0.00 per share in the third quarter of 2021. Normalized FFO was also $0.13
per share compared to a loss of $0.01 per share a year ago. The growth in FFO and normalized FFO was largely a result of a $0.12 per
share increase in interest and other income as well as a $0.01 per share increase in same-property cash NOI.
Same-property NOI was up 16.8% and same-property cash NOI was 19.1% higher compared to the third quarter 2021.
At the properties in the third quarter, we signed 55,000 square feet of new leases and renewals. Rents on those leases were down 3.3%
on a cash basis and up 2.2% on a GAAP basis. As of September 30, leased occupancy was 83.4% and commenced occupancy was
80.8%.
Turning to the balance sheet. We have approximately $2.6 billion of cash or $23 per share adjusted for the recently paid $1 per share
dividend, and we have no debt.
With respect to share buybacks, in the quarter, we repurchased 590,000 shares for $15 million at an average price of $25.40 per share or
$24.40 dividend adjusted. Year-to-date, we've repurchased 6.1 million shares for $155 million at an average dividend-adjusted price of
$24.64.
Since 2015, we've repurchased a total of 22.4 million shares for $595 million at an average dividend-adjusted price of $21.73. And today,
we have $120 million remaining on our existing share buyback authorization.
During the quarter, we completed the 351 transaction that we discussed on last quarter's call. The transaction generated $82 million of
taxable gain from 2 of our assets, and that gain made up a significant portion of the $1 per share special distribution that we paid on
October 18.
In terms of the current environment, today's debt and equity capital markets are markedly changed from earlier this year. The first half of
2022, sellers completed transactions at aggressive pricing driven by significant equity and debt availability. Today, the debt market is
experiencing disruption and debt funding costs have more than doubled with certain asset classes facing a significant shortage of
capacity.
Given the dearth of financing and the tepid buyer interest for value-add office, we have decided to hold the 3 properties we were
marketing for sale for the time being.
With respect to acquisitions, as we've said on past quarterly calls, we are continuing to evaluate a wide range of potential opportunities
across a variety of sectors. As most of you are well aware, we've been looking for a long time. I want to assure you that showing patience
has been challenging for us, as I know it's been for our investors.
While we'd love to be doing deals, we have a responsibility to be thoughtful stewards of our shareholders' capital and we take that to
heart. We'll continue to work to identify an acquisition opportunity that offers attractive, long-term fundamentals at a price that reflects
the risk we're taking. We're hopeful the challenges in the capital markets will be a catalyst for a compelling transaction that can serve as
the foundation for long-term growth and outperformance for EQC. The team at EQC remains focused, disciplined and optimistic.
With that, David, Bill and I are happy to take your questions.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) Our first question comes from Craig Mailman with Citi.
 
Craig Allen Mailman
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
I just want to start on the acquisition environment, not surprisingly. Clearly, there's price discovery still going on and really just a lack of
transactions. But as you guys are probably in a much envied position here holding on to so much cash, no debt, kind of can you just talk
about what property types in this environment may look more attractive than others? Obviously, you can't sell office here, maybe office is
less interesting. But as you kind of look across the property sectors, if the pricing does come in, where you think you want to deploy the
capital today.
 
David S. Weinberg
Equity Commonwealth - Executive VP & COO
Craig, it's David Weinberg. Good question, and let me just add to some of your comments as I answer. Not only do we have cash, we also
have equity in OP units. So we provide a lot of flexibility in terms of a deal structure.
And then in terms of where we're looking, it's across a variety of sectors, as David said, with the key being we want to find a deal that
provides long-term, attractive fundamentals at a price that we think reflects the risk we're taking.
So if you line them up on a spectrum, as you mentioned, on one end maybe office and I'd say hospitality, where clearly they're more
capital intensive, a lot more risk in those businesses. If we were to find an attractive deal there, we would have to make sure we're getting
price -- it's getting priced at a level we're getting paid for that risk compared to perhaps other sectors that we think still have strong
tailwinds despite some short-term headwinds. In those buckets, I'd say, as we've covered before, industrial and single-family residential.
We like both those businesses. The former clearly we took a very good run at recently and the latter, as we've discussed, it's just hard to
access that and scale.
So I can't say we've circled a specific sector. I'd say we continue to look across different sectors, and we're having conversations with
owners, brokers and bankers that represent a variety of asset classes as we look.
 
Craig Allen Mailman
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
I fully understand that private market hasn't moved as much. And so -- and there's just not as much in the market there. But clearly, the
public market has moved more swiftly in repricing the equity here. I mean, is that a better place to be looking today versus holding out for
a bigger private market transaction?
 
David A. Helfand
Equity Commonwealth - President, CEO & Trustee
I think that's a good question, Craig. It's David Helfand. Clearly, the public markets reflect what's going on more so than the private
markets where sellers don't have to sort of accept the change in rates and the change in environment, at least not yet.
I don't know if it's a better place to look. I think our general judgment is it's early. Things have changed pretty dramatically in terms of
availability of debt, cost of debt in all sectors and it's going to take a little time for sellers to acknowledge that.
I think we're well positioned. I think we're going to continue to show patience. But hopefully we'll get a shot here to find a really attractive
business that we can both invest in and then build on after the initial transaction.
 
Craig Allen Mailman
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
And moving -- my question has been more focused on the equity side. But just looking at the debt side, there's clearly, as you said, a
dearth of funding right now. I mean, from a risk-adjusted perspective, it would seem like there should be some opportunities there to
either lend to people or maybe even find a loan-to-own situation maybe through some type of debt investment, maybe even in the
secondary market. I mean, what's the kind of the landscape there look? And clearly, that would be less capital out the door, but it should
be very accretive relative to your cost of capital.
 
David A. Helfand
Equity Commonwealth - President, CEO & Trustee
Yes. A fair point, and we've discussed it on some prior calls. Sometimes a strategy of providing debt capital that turns into equity is the
best way to attach, and we would be open to that. We're not going to be a lender to be a lender, but we might provide debt capital to
pursue the equity.
 
Craig Allen Mailman
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
Okay. And then just one last one, and this is maybe a little bit outside the scope here. But Sam shut down his SPAC here back in August
because of the lack of deal opportunities here. And if you just look at EQC, you guys have had control of the company for a while, haven't
been able to make anything work but clearly continue to keep chugging along. I mean from his perspective, what is the nuance there
between EQC and the SPAC, clearly outside of just the stock price of the SPAC. But just kind of high-level thoughts on that decision
versus letting EQC continue to run.
 
David A. Helfand
Equity Commonwealth - President, CEO & Trustee
Yes. Well, you're referring to the SPAC that was designed to pursue industrial distribution businesses. Sam was the controlling
shareholder for almost 30 years of a company called Anixter, which was in the distribution business. When they sold that business, Sam
and the CEO decided to raise capital in the SPAC to try to find an acquisition. They weren't able to find one.
Of course, you know those SPACs have a specific time frame for the use of that capital. EQC is the opposite, we have no specific time
frame for the use of the capital.
I think I acknowledged in my opening comments this has gone longer in the tooth than any of us expected. I think absent what's
happened in the capital markets and in the economy, the uncertainty, the volatility, we probably were on a path to return the capital
because we haven't found anything. But we think there's new life here, a new opportunity and having the capital now and being patient
in looking for an attractive business at a fair price seems likelier to us today than it was in the past.
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions)
 
David A. Helfand
Equity Commonwealth - President, CEO & Trustee
Thank you for joining us, we appreciate it, and be well.
 
Operator
This concludes today's teleconference. You may disconnect your lines at this time. Thank you for your participation.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
©2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.