CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
Eric J. Cremers
PotlatchDeltic Corporation - President, CEO & Director
 
Jerald W. Richards
PotlatchDeltic Corporation - VP & CFO
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
George Leon Staphos
BofA Securities, Research Division - MD and Co-Sector Head in Equity Research
 
Ketan Mamtora
BMO Capital Markets Equity Research - Building Products Analyst
 
Kurt Willem Yinger
D.A. Davidson & Co., Research Division - Associate VP & Research Analyst
 
Mark Adam Weintraub
Seaport Research Partners - MD & Senior Research Analyst
 
Michael Andrew Roxland
Truist Securities, Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
 
Paul C. Quinn
RBC Capital Markets, Research Division - Director of Paper and Forest Products & Paper and Forest Products Analyst
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Good morning. My name is Lisa, and I will be your conference operator today. At this time, I would like to welcome everyone to the
PotlatchDeltic's Third Quarter 2022 Conference Call. (Operator Instructions)
I would now like to turn the call over to Mr. Jerry Richards, Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, for opening remarks. Sir, you may
proceed.
 
Jerald W. Richards
PotlatchDeltic Corporation - VP & CFO
Thank you, Lisa. Good morning, and welcome to PotlatchDeltic's Third Quarter 2022 Earnings Conference Call. Joining me on the call is
Eric Cremers, PotlatchDeltic's President and Chief Executive Officer. This call will contain forward-looking statements. Please review the
warning statements in our press release, on the presentation slides and in our filings with the SEC regarding the risks associated with
these forward-looking statements. Also, please note that a reconciliation of non-GAAP measures can be found on our website at
www.potlatchdeltic.com.
I'll turn the call over to Eric for some comments, and then I will review our third quarter results and our outlook.
 
Eric J. Cremers
PotlatchDeltic Corporation - President, CEO & Director
Thank you, Jerry. We reported third quarter total adjusted EBITDA of $101 million after the market closed yesterday. That makes 8 out of
the last 9 quarters that our quarterly EBITDA has exceeded $100 million. We are having another really strong year with EBITDA of $522
million through the first 3 quarters. Our financial results reflect the strength of our leverage to lumber strategy.
Our Wood Products segment's adjusted EBITDA was $31 million in the third quarter. Lumber prices were lower than last quarter as
expected, but they are still at attractive levels. The composite price has stabilized over the last couple of weeks and has increased
modestly to $494 per 1,000 board feet after declining 12 weeks in a row. Lumber futures are also back above $500 per thousand board
feet.
We continue to expect that lumber prices will remain above long-term averages. We shipped 265 million board feet of lumber in the third
quarter, which was 11 million feet more than we shipped in Q2. Transportation was a significant risk when we entered the third quarter,
but availability of railcars and trucks has improved considerably. We successfully completed the rebuild of our Ola, Arkansas sawmill,
and restarted the large log line on schedule in the third quarter. The start-up phase is underway, and the mill is expected to reach its 150
million board feet annual capacity on a run rate basis by the end of 2022 as planned. As a reminder, Ola's rebuild also significantly
lowers the mill's cash processing costs and improves its log recovery.
Our Timberlands segment generated adjusted EBITDA of $65 million in the third quarter. Our Southern Timberlands team continued to
take advantage of favorable logging conditions and strong log demand resulting in harvest volumes that exceeded our expectations.
Notably, our team set a quarterly harvest record for our Southern Timberlands business. The addition of CatchMark's timberlands will
provide another boost in the fourth quarter.
Idaho harvest volumes were seasonally higher this quarter but fell short of our plan, primarily due to contractor availability issues. Our
Idaho team is working hard to address the issues, and they have a plan in place to reduce the harvest shortfall in the fourth quarter. Our
Real Estate segment had another solid quarter with adjusted EBITDA of $14 million. On the rural side of the business, we sold 1,600
acres at nearly $4,000 an acre.
The development side of our real estate business remains strong. Residential lot inventory in our Chenal Valley master planned
community remains at low levels, and we continue to have good take-up on our lot offerings. We also completed over $6 million of
commercial land sales in the quarter, which averaged $183,000 per acre. That is 3 quarters in a row that we have closed commercial
sales in Chenal, resulting in total revenue $11 million thus far this year.
Turning to housing. We continue to believe that the backdrop is favorable over the long term. There is a fundamental shortage of
housing stock due largely to the combination of underbuilding after the great financial crisis and favorable demographics in the form of
millennials, who are the largest demographic cohort in U.S. history. While the rapid increase in mortgage rates has played a key role in
slowing housing demand, the Fed's aggressive pace could turn into an easing cycle beginning as soon as mid-2023.
Lower demand should also result in home prices declining. Acknowledging that it will take time, we expect demand to increase in U.S.
housing starts to return to levels above the long-term average of 1.5 million units per year once homes become more affordable. In the
meantime, a number of housing units under construction in the U.S. remains elevated at 1.7 million units in September. The elevated
level of housing units under construction supports lumber demand in the near term.
In addition, home buyers and builders have ways to respond to affordability issues. For example, remote work opened the possibility to
move to less costly parts of the country for a lot of people, builder concessions or a shift in product mix to smaller homes or fewer
amenities are other examples.
Shifting to repair and remodel, the largest market segment for lumber demand, the underlying fundamentals continue to be favorable
for a variety of reasons. Existing U.S. housing stock remains the oldest in the history of the statistic at 42 years on average. This is
important because older homes are significantly smaller than new homes on average, and the older homes typically need more repairs.
Higher mortgage rates mean that people are much more likely to stay in their existing homes. Remodeling is a very attractive option for
homeowners, given record levels of home equity across the U.S., a strong job market and the fact that consumer balance sheets remain
in great shape. In addition, higher interest rates usually have less of an effect on repair and remodel demand than other factors.
(inaudible) expect repair and remodel spending to continue to grow. The National Association of Homebuilders is forecasting a 7%
increase in R&R spending in 2022, a 6% increase in 2023 and a 4% increase in 2024. Harvard's leading indicator of remodeling activity
report forecast R&R spending will be 6.5% higher year-over-year in Q4 of next year. Both forecasts imply healthy lumber volume growth
in the R&R segment given much lower but still attractive lumber prices. Our home center customer takeaway remains strong, and we
remain optimistic about lumber demand in the repair and remodel market segment.
Turning to CatchMark. The merger closed on the 14th of September. We continue to be excited about the strategic and financial benefits
provided by the transaction. While we only operated the Timberlands for 2 weeks in the quarter, we were very pleased with log price
realizations and harvest volumes. Integration of the 2 companies is going faster than anticipated as we have already achieved CAD
synergies of $15 million. Also, we now expect to achieve CAD synergies of $21 million versus the $16 million target that we communicated
when we announced the transaction at the end of May due to higher interest savings than planned. The sharp rise in interest rates led to
a significant increase in the value of our interest rate swaps, which allowed us to reduce the combined company's interest run rate by
$8.5 million annually. Jerry will provide more color on the interest savings.
As discussed on last quarter's earnings call, we were the successful bidder on 3 bolt-on timberland transactions earlier this year,
aggregating $101 million in total. In total, these transactions add approximately 46,000 acres to our ownership in Mississippi and
Arkansas, and the last of the 3 transactions closed earlier this month. Given our strong results in the first half of the year, we expect to
pay another special dividend this year. While the amount depends on our performance for the remainder of the year, we expect the
amount will be much lower than the $4 special dividend we paid last year. We will review the special dividend with our Board in
December.
On the theme of returning cash to shareholders, our Board approved a new $200 million share repurchase program in August. We
believe repurchasing stock at the current price level is very attractive, and we look forward to our trading window opening in early
November, 1 week from today. Finally, we remain committed to growing our regular dividend sustainably, increasing our stable cash
flows with the CatchMark merger and the bolt-on timberland transactions provides the opportunity to continue doing so. Now that said,
the relative attractiveness of deploying capital to repurchase shares given the current steep discount to our estimated NAV will factor
into our analysis. We typically review the regular dividend with our Board in the fourth quarter.
At the end of Q3, we have $484 million of cash on the balance sheet, and liquidity of nearly $800 million. Our leverage remains low, and
our financial strength provides a solid platform for continued growth. Regarding environmental, social and governance reporting, we
published our third annual ESG report in May, and our first carbon and climate report in September. Our team is currently working on
developing a full ESG section of our website. PotlatchDeltic has a strong ESG story, and we are committed to do our part to mitigate
climate change and continue our legacy of responsibility across the ESG spectrum.
To wrap up my comments, PotlatchDeltic remains very well positioned, and our strong balance sheet and liquidity provide a high degree
of flexibility as we seek to maximize shareholder value. While there is no doubt that new residential construction is weakening, given
affordability issues, our view is that R&R spending will remain relatively strong over the next couple of years. In addition, the housing
construction downturn may prove to be relatively short-lived.
I will now turn it over to Jerry to discuss our third quarter results and our outlook.
 
Jerald W. Richards
PotlatchDeltic Corporation - VP & CFO
Thank you, Eric. Starting with Page 5 of the slides. Adjusted EBITDDA was $101 million in the third quarter. The quarter-over-quarter
decline in EBITDDA was primarily due to lower lumber prices. I'll now review each of our operating segments and provide more color on
our third quarter results. Information for our Timberlands segment is displayed on Slides 6 through 8.
The segment's adjusted EBITDDA increased from $58 million in the second quarter to $65 million in the third quarter. Our sawlog
harvest in the North increased from 276,000 tons in the second quarter to 459,000 tons in the third quarter. Our second quarter harvest
was constrained by spring breakup and unseasonably wet weather in June. Our quarterly harvest volume is typically the highest in the
third quarter as dry weather results in more favorable logging conditions. Having said that, our harvest fell short of plan in the third
quarter, primarily due to log and haul contractor availability issues.
Our Northern team is working through those issues, and they have a plan to make up as much of the harvest shortfall as possible in the
fourth quarter. Northern sawlog prices were 25% lower on a per ton basis in the third quarter compared to the second quarter. The
decline in sawlog prices primarily reflects lower prices for indexed sawlogs. Our index prices reset on a 1-month lag, which means the
second quarter index prices reflect much higher lumber prices in April and May. In the South, we harvested 1.4 million tons in the third
quarter compared to 1 million tons in the second quarter. Relatively dry conditions and solid execution by our Southern Timberlands
team allowed us to continue to take advantage of strong sawlog demand.
While it's not apparent from the rounded results on Slide 8, our southern sawlog prices were 1% higher in the third quarter compared to
the second quarter. The increase was driven by 2 weeks of volume in CatchMark's stronger Southern markets and a seasonally higher mix
of hardwood sawlogs. As discussed on last quarter's earnings call, we expected Southern Yellow Pine sawlogs to decline modestly in our
legacy operations in the third quarter due to increased log availability. The decline proved to be milder than we anticipated and pine
sawlog prices in our legacy wood baskets remain higher on a year-over-year basis.
Moving to Wood Products on Slides 9 and 10. Adjusted EBITDDA declined from $107 million in the second quarter to $31 million in the
third quarter. Our average lumber price realization decreased 34% from $865 per thousand board feet in the second quarter to $572 per
thousand board feet in the third quarter. By comparison, the random links framing lumber composite price was 28% lower in the third
quarter than the second quarter. As a reminder, the lag we experienced between booking and shipping orders is not captured by the
composite, which is closer to a real-time indication of price.
Our lumber prices were flat for much of the third quarter before declining about 10% in September. Our average lumber price
realizations per thousand board feet were $590 in July, $593 in August and $534 in September. Lumber shipments increased 11 million
board feet from 254 million board feet in the second quarter to 265 million board feet in the third quarter. Our team worked hard to
mitigate transportation issues to achieve that result.
Shifting to real estate on slides 11 and 12. The segment's adjusted EBITDDA was $14 million in the third quarter compared to $22 million
in the second quarter. EBITDDA generated by rural sales declined sequentially due to the mix and timing of transactions. For example,
second quarter results included a 10,700 acre Minnesota conservation transaction at just over $800 per acre, while the third quarter
consisted of the sale of only 1,600 acres in total. As a reminder, the Minnesota sale, I referenced is the last meaningful sale in that state
as it culminated a long-term strategy that created approximately $300 million of value for shareholders.
Business remains solid in our Chenal Valley master planned community in Little Rock, Arkansas as we generated $9 million of EBITDDA
in the third quarter. Residential lot sales remained strong with 48 lots sold in the third quarter, and we closed the sale of 2 more
commercial real estate lots for an average price of $183,000 per acre in the third quarter. We have closed at least 1 commercial sale every
quarter this year for an average price of $275,000 per acre.
Turning to financial items, which are summarized on Slide 13. Our total liquidity was $773 million. This amount includes $484 million of
cash as well as availability on our undrawn revolver. We plan to refinance the $40 million of debt scheduled to mature in December
2022. We have locked the refinance rate, which will reduce our interest rate approximately 100 basis points on this debt, resulting in
lower annual interest expense of approximately $400,000.
CatchMark had $300 million of debt when the merger closed in September. We used about half of our forward starting interest rate
swaps to refinance $277.5 million of CatchMark's debt at a fixed rate of 1.8% net of patronage, and we used cash to pay off the remaining
$22.5 million of CatchMark's debt. We also applied CatchMark's interest rate swaps to reduce the interest rate on $150 million
PotlatchDeltic term loan by over 200 basis points. Overall, the refinance and the use of CatchMark swaps reduced the combined
company's annual interest run rate by $8.5 million. That amount is significantly higher than the amount of interest savings that we
expected when we communicated our CAD synergy target last May.
In aggregate, the interest savings reduced our weighted average cost of our outstanding debt from 3.1% to 2.4%. We've largely been
precluded from discretionary share repurchases since our first quarter earnings call due to the CatchMark merger and SEC rules. We
were required to suspend our 10b5-1 plan in August when a registration statement was declared defective. We remain committed to
repurchasing our shares at attractive prices, and we look forward to our trading window, reopening in early November.
We expect to pay another special dividend in December. While the actual amount is dependent upon our financial performance for the
rest of the year, we believe that this year's special dividend will be much lower than the $4 per share we paid in 2021. Capital
expenditures were $13 million in the third quarter. That amount includes real estate development expenditures, which are included in
cash from operations in our cash flow statement, and it excludes timberland acquisitions. As Eric mentioned, we were the successful
bidders on 3 bolt-on timberland acquisitions in Mississippi and Arkansas earlier this year for $101 million in the aggregate. We use cash
to close all 3 transactions, and $16 million to close the last of the 3 transactions in October.
I'll now provide some high-level outlook comments. The details are presented on Slide 14. We expect to harvest 1.8 million to 1.9 million
tons in our Timberlands segment in the fourth quarter. Harvest volumes in the North are planned to be comparable to the third quarter.
This is higher than typical for the fourth quarter as our team is working to reduce the third quarter harvest shortfall. We expect Northern
sawlog prices to decline about 25% in the fourth quarter. In the South, we plan to harvest 1.4 million tons in total in the fourth quarter.
This volume includes approximately 400,000 tons of sawlogs and pulpwood from the CatchMark acres. We expect our Southern sawlog
prices to increase modestly due primarily to a higher mix of CatchMark's stronger southern markets.
We plan to ship 265 million to 275 million board feet of lumber in the fourth quarter. This assumes that the Ola, Arkansas sawmill
startup remains on track. Our average lumber price thus far in the fourth quarter is approximately 10% lower than our third quarter
average lumber price. This is based on approximately 100 million board feet of lumber. Our lumber spot price is approximately 11% lower
than our third quarter average lumber price, and our prices started firming recently.
As a reminder, a $10 per thousand board foot change in lumber price equals approximately $12 million of consolidated EBITDDA for us
on an annual basis. Shifting to real estate. We expect to sell approximately 1,500 acres of rural land and 23 Chenal Valley residential lots
in the fourth quarter. Additional real estate details are provided on the slide.
Our total capital expenditures are planned to be in the range of $85 million to $90 million in 2022, excluding acquisitions. This estimate
includes approximately $18 million for the Ola rebuild which we expect will be reimbursed by insurance. The estimate also includes $12
million deposit for the Waldo modernization expansion project that we announced in June. Overall, we expect our total adjusted
EBITDDA will be lower in the fourth quarter due to lower lumber and index sawlog prices.
Having said that, lumber prices remain at attractive levels. We're well positioned to continue growing shareholder value over the long
term. So that concludes our prepared remarks. Lisa, I'd now like to open the call up to Q&A.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions)
Your first question comes from the line of Mark Weintraub with Seaport Global.
 
Mark Adam Weintraub
Seaport Research Partners - MD & Senior Research Analyst
As you're thinking about capital deployment, so you talked about you're going to have a special dividend. You talked about an appetite
for share repurchase with the stock where it's at. You've done a number of acquisitions. Are you still on the lookout? Is that still part of
likely capital deployment in the next 6, 12 months? And then tying it all together, what type of balance sheet or other metrics should we
focus on in understanding what your comfortability and target type ranges are?
 
Eric J. Cremers
PotlatchDeltic Corporation - President, CEO & Director
So Mark, this is Eric. Yes, our appetite is -- we want to continue to try to grow the company through timberland acquisitions. And you're
right, we've been successful this year, not just with CatchMark, but also with 46,000 acres and $101 million or so that we spent on the
bolt-ons. What I'd tell you is that the timberland market is getting, in our opinion, a little bit overheated.
For example, we competed here recently in 2 different tracks. We lost these deals. One of them was attracted in Georgia. We went to
nearly 22.5x EBITDDA. And the other one was in Alabama. We lost this one as well. We went to 23.5x EBITDDA. Both those transactions,
we went to the low end of our discount rate range. We lost both of them. And we were told we were in the middle of the pack, of bidders.
So that means people are paying north of 22, 23, 24x EBITDDA for timberland. And that's the max that we're going to go, given our
current discount rate range. So while we like to continue to grow and we will continue to compete and we'll try to take down timberland
M&A because we think it's a very attractive asset class.
There is a point at which it no longer creates shareholder value. And so in our mind, we're going to have to pivot here -- with our strong
balance sheet, with our cash that we have on the balance sheet, we're going to have to pivot into other capital allocation priorities. And
coincidentally, our average analyst estimated NAV is up around $63 a share. And as we sit here today, we're at, I don't know, $44 a share.
We're trading dramatically below what people believe our NAV is. And so it seems to us like it presents just a fantastic time.
We -- honestly, we've been waiting for this opportunity to step in and buy shares for some time. We've said all along, we want to buy
stock when it's depressed, not when it's at fair value. And well, guess what? Today, it's depressed and it's time for us to step in and put
our money where our mouth is. And that's going to start happening about a week from today. So I'm going to let Jerry answer the second
question on balance sheet. But does that answer your question on the first half?
 
Mark Adam Weintraub
Seaport Research Partners - MD & Senior Research Analyst
Yes, that's super.
 
Jerald W. Richards
PotlatchDeltic Corporation - VP & CFO
Yes. So Mark, picking up on the kind of the balance sheet part of that question. I would say, overall, really no shift or change given our
posture and our metrics in terms of how we manage that balance sheet. I mean, at a high level, having strength and flexibility has served
us well in the past, and we plan to maintain that going forward. And as a reminder, our EBITDDA leverage, which is a key metric that we
monitor and talk to our credit rating agencies with is EBITDDA leverage, and we continue to expect to maintain that in the 3.5 to 4x
range.
Today, we find ourselves under 1. So a lot of flexibility there. But the long-term goal through a cycle, which I should emphasize here,
really remains in that 3.5 to 4x range. And we like to have a bit of cash, again, to be opportunistic and have some flexibility. In the past,
we've talked about having a minimum of $100 million of cash (inaudible) on the balance sheet. So no change there.
 
Mark Adam Weintraub
Seaport Research Partners - MD & Senior Research Analyst
Okay, super. That's very helpful. And obviously, when you're talking about 3.5 to 4x, that's kind of over the cycle. So we can't necessarily
look at the current EBITDDA, which is presumably -- you have been at extremely high level. So you're presumably using different
numbers internally when you think about what that translates into in terms of a gross number. Is that fair?
 
Jerald W. Richards
PotlatchDeltic Corporation - VP & CFO
That is spot on, Mark. We -- when I look at that 3.5 to 4x target, we're really modeling and stress testing a low point in the cycle kind of
perspective because we want to maintain debt levels kind of under that range even at a low point.
 
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Kurt Yinger with D.A. Davidson.
 
Kurt Willem Yinger
D.A. Davidson & Co., Research Division - Associate VP & Research Analyst
Just wanted to start out on the special dividend. And Eric, you touched on it a bit in the prepared remarks, but I mean with 3 quarters in
the books and some stability here in the lumber markets, is there any way you could maybe help us quantify a range of what that might
look like as well as how you're thinking about any discretionary component versus share repurchases or other capital deployment
opportunities?
 
Jerald W. Richards
PotlatchDeltic Corporation - VP & CFO
Yes. So I'll actually take that one, Kurt. This is Jerry. In terms of stepping back, as a reminder for the group, we mentioned this in the
prepared comments, but we paid a $4 per share special dividend last year. And I think we've had a position -- at least, the last couple of
quarters, it feels like where we said, this year's special dividend is going to be significantly lower. And there's a number of factors that
play in. And first and foremost, it's really important. I think we must have mentioned between Eric and I, 4 times in the prepared
comments, the priority that share repurchases, and the attractiveness of share repurchases at the current discount that we trade.
And deviating a little bit here, and I'll get back to the point of the question, we just put a new $200 million share repurchase
authorization in place. Our window reopens November 1. So to the degree we can shift capital to share repurchases from a special to the
degree we have that discretion. That makes all the sense in the world to us again, given the discount that we trade at today. When you go
back to that $4 per share special dividend that we paid in December of 2021, I mentioned this on last quarter's call, but there is a 40%
discretionary component to that. I mean, overall, the special dividend is primarily to protect our REIT status by kind of purging excess
cash from the taxable REIT subsidiary, but we also included a 40% discretionary component on top.
And as a reminder, we're trading around $60 a share last year versus the $44 that Eric talks about today. So clearly, that capital
allocation set of priorities have shifted. And when you think about other moving parts, Idaho sawlog prices, when you step back for the
full year, probably down about 30% year-over-year, so that's going to reduce kind of the amount that's needed for a special dividend.
Lumber prices are down as well. Again, that really goes into the amount of cash that we have to purge out that taxable REIT subsidiary.
And we've also grown the regular dividend.
Payout, for example, just with the shares we issued in the CatchMark merger is up $20 million year-over-year, and that effectively shifts
-- potentially would have been special dividend dollars over into the regular dividend bucket. So for all those reasons, it's hard to pin
down the number exactly this year. We'll sit down with the Board in early December, when we review it. But it feels like it's probably in
the $1 per share range, maybe just a bit under $1 per share, just to give some benchmarks.
 
Kurt Willem Yinger
D.A. Davidson & Co., Research Division - Associate VP & Research Analyst
Got it. Okay. That's all very helpful. And then, I guess, in terms of northern sawlog prices, for the Waldo project, you've used $500, and
we're about there now. So we will just use that. But I mean there's some variability with the timing of indexing and log density. But I
guess if you were to kind of use that $500 per thousand assumption. Is something in the $130 a ton ZIP code for Northern sawlogs kind
of a reasonable starting point?
 
Jerald W. Richards
PotlatchDeltic Corporation - VP & CFO
Yes. And I guess to clarify, Kurt, I'm assuming you're talking 2023 in its entirety. And if that's the case, that is a reasonable proxy.
 
Kurt Willem Yinger
D.A. Davidson & Co., Research Division - Associate VP & Research Analyst
Okay. Got it. And then lastly, log costs were a slight sequential benefit in Wood Products in Q3, but maybe a bit less than I expected
given the decline in your own Idaho realizations. Is that just a timing factor around when inventories were built at the mill? And any
thoughts around the benefits on the wood product side from at least the lower sawlog costs in Idaho in Q4, and maybe even the early
part of next year?
 
Jerald W. Richards
PotlatchDeltic Corporation - VP & CFO
Yes. I would say, Kurt, the premise behind your question is spot on. It's really all about timing. And when you think about it, there's
seasonality around the log deck and when it gets built and when it gets torn down. And a lot of the high-priced logs that the mill has
been -- the complex has been processing even in the third quarter, really purchased earlier in the year when lumber prices and index log
prices were much higher, certainly, a bit of relief.
As that averaging kind of takes place and the log deck is kind of torn down. We'll start building that log deck in preparation for spring
break up here. In fact, that's already in the works and well down the road. So you're averaging lower-priced logs into that log deck. So
expectation is you'll see a little bit more price relief from a log cost standpoint in Idaho in Q4, and then you'll probably get to a new run
rate as you think about your model as you move into 2023.
 
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of George Staphos with Bank of America Securities.
 
George Leon Staphos
BofA Securities, Research Division - MD and Co-Sector Head in Equity Research
Good quarters here. Quick question for you, on Northern harvest and contractor availability, what are your plans? How do you expect to
be able to get more contractors and more production in the fourth quarter? If you could give a bit more color, that would be great.
 
Jerald W. Richards
PotlatchDeltic Corporation - VP & CFO
You bet. It feels -- so this is Jerry, George. It feels a lot like what we experienced in the South a year or 2 ago when we had contract
availability issues. And really starts with -- there isn't really much in the way of surge capacity when you think about log-in haul
contractors. I mean over time, hear about tight labor markets, and it also feels like there's been a bit of migration as the contractor
workforce ages out.
So I think there's a challenge in kind of replenishing the folks that are working in that space. So you start with a pretty tight surge
capacity. Our team does a really good job over time managing in that tight environment. But when you layer on top of it, things like
equipment breakdowns the contractors have and then all of a sudden supply-chain issues and getting critical spare parts and delays, it
starts to have a kind of a ripple effect. And then once you get behind without that surge capacity, it's really hard and quite frankly, it's
impossible to get caught up. So that's a bit of what the team was wrestling and came to the forefront in Q3.
Now in terms of what do you do to manage through that as a large player in Idaho, that certainly helps because we have deep and
long-term relationships with some good quality contractors. So just really effectively managing and leveraging those relationships to
make sure we get the kind of the focus that we need, and when I think about just in terms of some color on, where do we think we'll land
in the harvest in Idaho for the year? We're about 200,000 tons short against our plan year-to-date in the end of Q3, the team -- if things,
weather holds and having said that, it's got a little wet here, so it either needs to dry out or freeze up. I can't be in this middle ground. But
if weather holds, we'd probably make up about half of that shortfall, and end up about 100,000 tons short. Now flip side is we're
obviously running well ahead in the South. So overall, from a harvest volume standpoint, we're actually up versus what we had expected
at the start of the year.
 
George Leon Staphos
BofA Securities, Research Division - MD and Co-Sector Head in Equity Research
But aside from leveraging your relationships, I mean, does it mean that the incremental margin on those harvests when they do come in
on the production would be maybe a little bit lower in terms of other incentives that you might be even to offer to more availabilities? I
wouldn't imagine there's much, but is there any sort of capital involved in doing that as well? Just a couple of quick thoughts on that as
well.
 
Jerald W. Richards
PotlatchDeltic Corporation - VP & CFO
So in terms of cost, I mean, the big story when you think about log and haul costs this year is really [diesel]. You step back, certainly, our
log and haul rates are up. But that probably explains something on the order of 75%, 80% of the increase in cost. Now having said that,
there's fairness in the premise of your question, which is that rates have gone up as well because of tightness. And that's true both in the
South and in the North.
 
Eric J. Cremers
PotlatchDeltic Corporation - President, CEO & Director
And what I would just add, George, is when you look at the fourth quarter, we're targeting 450,000 to 500,000 tons of sawlogs more or
less, and maybe a little bit of pulpwood. All we really need to do in Q4 is to do what we did in Q3. And Q3 was a challenge for us, no
doubt. But we still got nearly 500,000 tons in Q3. So all we got to do in Q4 is do the same thing. It's just that we typically build our log
decks earlier in the year. We typically build them in Q3. And this year, some of that slipped into Q4.
 
George Leon Staphos
BofA Securities, Research Division - MD and Co-Sector Head in Equity Research
No, that's great. Eric, that makes sense. One sort of quick question, kind of a bigger picture one, though. So we tend to think about the
fourth quartile being roughly $500,000 per board feet -- $500 per thousand board feet on the -- and we tend to look at British Columbia
as kind of setting that point. How do you expect the fourth quartile to evolve over the next year or so, recognizing it's hard to project that?
Do you think it declined cyclically? Do you think it hangs in at that level, and why?
And then on repair model, we understand, given all your sources that you expect that, that will remain pretty stout into '23 and '24. But
intuitively, shouldn't we expect repair and model to drop a bit with housing starts and so much a repair model comes from the activity
that happens once somebody -- I shouldn't say housing starts, but home purchases after the person buys a home and starts remodeling
it in that first year. Good luck in the quarter.
 
Eric J. Cremers
PotlatchDeltic Corporation - President, CEO & Director
Yes. Thanks, George. So your question on fourth quartile, kind of the cost curve, if you will, how is it going to evolve over the next year or
2. I frankly don't think it's going to change a whole lot. We know where there are structural issues with lumber in North America from a
cost standpoint. And that's British Columbia, and increasingly, the Pacific Northwest. The harvest volumes are coming down over on the
West side, roughly 10% over the next couple of years. It's not just British Columbia.
So frankly, it's going to stress mills for sure. And you're seeing some curtailments right now up in BC in particular. But it's not -- all these
mill closures are not going to happen overnight. If you ask me 10 years from now, where do I think the cost curve is going to be? It will be
maybe $450, not $500 for that fourth quartile segment. But in the next year or 2, I think it stays up in that $500 zip code. People are --
nobody likes to close a sawmill and let employees go and it disrupts residual streams, and that has implications for pulp mills and pellet
mills and lots of things. So I don't think the roster changes materially over the next year or 2.
Now with regard to repair and model, yes, sure, you're right. As new home sales come down, that is going to have a tendency. That effect
alone will tend to push down R&R. But I think more R&R expenditures are for when somebody buys an existing house or is living in a
house that they kind of feel trapped in for a lack of a better word because they can't afford to move into a new house. I don't think people
typically go buy a new house and then say, oh, let's remodel this brand-new house that we just bought. I think it tends to be more older,
more existing kind of houses, if you will.
So yes, there's no doubt. On the one hand, fewer new home sales will put some downward pressure on R&R spending. But I think all the
other factors that we laid out between record home equity levels, strong job market, consumer balance sheets are in great shape. I think
all those factors outweigh the fact that new residential starts are going to be coming down.
 
George Leon Staphos
BofA Securities, Research Division - MD and Co-Sector Head in Equity Research
Yes. And I really meant to say existing home sales trending lower, having more of an effect on repair model. But your point is about
feeling trapped the age of the home stock and so on is important as well.
 
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Ketan Mamtora with BMO Capital Markets.
 
Ketan Mamtora
BMO Capital Markets Equity Research - Building Products Analyst
Eric, can you talk a little bit about channel inventories on the lumber side, both in retail as well as on the Pro side?
 
Eric J. Cremers
PotlatchDeltic Corporation - President, CEO & Director
Yes, I can talk about them in general, Ketan. We don't really track them closely. Once they leave our mills and they go to customers, it's
just anecdotal evidence that we pick up from talking to folks. And our understanding is that they're at really low levels. And the home
center takeaway, it's at or above pre-pandemic levels. So our home center business is rock solid right now. And our sense is that most of
that uptick, that strength, if you will, is coming from the pro contractor side as opposed to the DIY side. But our view is that inventories
throughout the channels are relatively low, and especially in R&R, demand remains very strong.
 
Ketan Mamtora
BMO Capital Markets Equity Research - Building Products Analyst
Got it. That's helpful. And then maybe switching to the real estate side. Eric, can you talk about the opportunity that you have on the
CatchMark portfolio in terms of alternative streams of revenue? If you can touch on -- touch upon solar, that would be helpful as well.
 
Jerald W. Richards
PotlatchDeltic Corporation - VP & CFO
You bet. So I'll take that one, Ketan, this is Jerry. In terms of CatchMark real estate opportunities, that's one of many reasons why we're
really excited about having completed this deal. As we laid out in our kind of announcement slides back in May, a lot of CatchMark's land
is proximate to some large population centers, and that's different than what we've had in our rest of our southern acres, in our legacy
holdings. So that by itself, we think, creates a lot of opportunities. The other trend we've seen -- and we closed our knowledge is the first
solar deal earlier this year and the first quarter, and that was very attractive.
Certainly, we see those kinds of opportunities in CatchMark's footprint as well. And the other thing I will share is, once we close the deal,
we did the same thing with Deltic, we did the same thing with Luter which would close last December. As we go through and we actually
take our teams, our expertise and knowledge, and we go through it and we stratify every one of those acres. And that process is
underway. It will take our team probably 6 to 9 months to really kind of go through the whole portfolio.
It doesn't mean that we're not going to sell real estate off a CatchMark land before then. We will. In fact, we expect probably just under
1,000 acres in the fourth quarter, for example, here. But that's where we're really kind of surface and start to gauge, what is the
magnitude of that opportunity above and beyond what CatchMark was doing historically? So stay tuned. We'll come back and provide an
update as we complete that stratification process.
 
Ketan Mamtora
BMO Capital Markets Equity Research - Building Products Analyst
Okay. That's helpful. And then just one other question. What is the right way to think about sustainable harvest with CatchMark sort of
completion? And if you can break that between the North and the South.
 
Jerald W. Richards
PotlatchDeltic Corporation - VP & CFO
Yes. So in terms of sustainable harvest, I mean, one -- I mean, obviously, we've got a lot of moving parts this year with the $101 million of
bolt-on timberland transactions. We've got CatchMark in the midst. And we're also in the throes of our budget process. And as part of
that, we go back and we recalibrate our harvest plans going forward long term, not just for next year. So if I were to step back, and we'll
provide guidance once we finish that process here when we release fourth quarter earnings. But give or take, it's probably around 8
million tons. Again, the actual number will depend upon probably a bit above 8 million tons, but it will be -- we'll come back with that
information. And then you've seen the historical run rate in Idaho. We haven't added or subtracted from Idaho, so a delta is going to be in
the South.
 
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Mike Roxland with Truist Securities.
 
Michael Andrew Roxland
Truist Securities, Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
First question just was on CatchMark. Now that you've had some time to digest the acquisition, is there anything that you were not
expecting, going into the transaction? Just from my background with the industry and certain interactions with the company, CatchMark
has historically been, I think, somewhat aggressive with their harnessing level. So I'm wondering if there's anything that as you've had
time to look through and look at things more carefully, whether things really did haven't worked out. And it could be just maybe 1 or 2
things that are off a little bit, but is there anything that you weren't expecting now that you've closed the transaction?
 
Eric J. Cremers
PotlatchDeltic Corporation - President, CEO & Director
Mike, I would -- I don't -- I would say, no, to be honest with you, like we mentioned in our prepared remarks, the harvest volumes are
coming in spot on. And we talked about this when we announced the merger, we'll be in this 1.6 million, 1.8 million tons for the next, who
knows 8, 9 years. It will dip 100,000 tons or so as you get out into the future for a couple of years, and then it comes right back. So we're
not disappointed with the timber inventory.
Pricing has met our expectations. It's kind of hit our merger model, if you will. And frankly, for the next 3 to 4 years, as I recall, we really
don't have much pricing increase in CatchMark's markets. The only real surprise I would say is -- and Jerry talked about this, is our
refinance opportunities have only gone up compared to where they were before. So I would say, no, their assets are good. We'll see how
the real estate stratification plays out. But I've got to believe with CatchMark's ground being closer to major metropolitan kind of urban
areas, Atlanta, Colombia, whatnot, I would have to believe the real estate opportunity is going to be better than what we initially thought
too, but we got to give the real estate team time to go through their stratification. But no, we've been very pleasantly surprised so far.
 
Michael Andrew Roxland
Truist Securities, Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
Got you. And just last question is on lumber or (inaudible). I think last quarter, you mentioned new restructuring at a couple of weeks.
Have they shorted it at all, just given what's happened in (inaudible)?
 
Eric J. Cremers
PotlatchDeltic Corporation - President, CEO & Director
No. They really haven't, Mike. They're still in the 1- to 2-week kind of ZIP code kind of at the traditional levels. And I think it goes back to
what I said before. Yes, sure, housing starts are under pressure. We all get that. Affordability is an issue. But the R&R side of the
equation, we think, is hanging in there just fine. So I think those 2 may be are canceling each other out.
 
Operator
Your next question comes from the line of Paul Quinn with RBC Capital Markets.
 
Paul C. Quinn
RBC Capital Markets, Research Division - Director of Paper and Forest Products & Paper and Forest Products Analyst
Just a question on timberland markets. It sounds like you lost a couple of deals, and it seems like I'm seeing timberland prices remaining
strong despite rising interest rates and therefore, discount rates, why is that?
 
Eric J. Cremers
PotlatchDeltic Corporation - President, CEO & Director
Paul, I think people love the timber asset class, number one, this notion that it's a hedge against inflation, scarce resource. I honestly
think carbon is starting to get priced into some of these valuation models. We haven't explicitly priced it into our model yet. But I'll tell
you, we are working on some carbon projects. So I would not be surprised if at some point in time in the future, there's a line item in our
cash flow statement that says carbon.
I think the other thing is kind of interesting is that nontraditional buyers increasingly are showing up to bid on these tracks. And I'm
referring to Apple. I'm referring to IKEA. IKEA now has -- this is a furniture retailer, IKEA, now has, I don't know, nearly 150,000 acres of
Southern Timberland. So I think the asset class is increasingly attractive, not just from carbon, but also these other nontraditional buyers.
And it's putting -- and one, also, you look at what's happening up in BC and the Pacific Northwest with harvests coming down, the action
is in the South, and that's where most of the deals are happening.
 
Paul C. Quinn
RBC Capital Markets, Research Division - Director of Paper and Forest Products & Paper and Forest Products Analyst
All right. And then specifically on carbon, how are you going to monetize that? Or what's the framework we should be thinking about if
we wanted to pencil some value in for carbon?
 
Eric J. Cremers
PotlatchDeltic Corporation - President, CEO & Director
Well, I would tell you that it's very early stages, number one. But number two, at this stage of the game, carbon values don't compete
with sawlog values. They're not even remotely close. But I will tell you, there are some tracks that maybe are not super highly attractive
plantation-style forestry, maybe like a hardwood stand, for example, where carbon values could outpace what that hardwood value
might be. And it's too soon for me to say because we're at the early stages, talking to a couple of different parties about monetizing some
of this ground, but we'll see how it plays out.
 
Paul C. Quinn
RBC Capital Markets, Research Division - Director of Paper and Forest Products & Paper and Forest Products Analyst
Okay. And then just switching over to real estate at a high level. What are your expectations for 2023 in that portfolio?
 
Jerald W. Richards
PotlatchDeltic Corporation - VP & CFO
So I appreciate the attempt, Paul. But like I said, we'll come back in our Q4 release, and we'll provide guidance on 2023. I mean
historically, rural -- and we've been in that 20,000-acre range. That's certainly going to be lower because Minnesota, as we've mentioned
in the last couple of quarters, is essentially done. So I don't know if it's half, a little more than half of that 20,000, is a decent placeholder
at this point. And then our average in all run rate for residential lot sales has been somewhere in the 150, 160 lot range. Now we're at 180
this year. But obviously -- and we still see some relative strength in that market, but it'd be a little premature to look forward to '23 and
say, we'll have a repeat at the 180-lot level.
 
Operator
At this time, I am showing there are no more questions. I'll now turn the call back over to Jerry Richards.
 
Jerald W. Richards
PotlatchDeltic Corporation - VP & CFO
All right. Thank you, Lisa. And thanks, everybody, for your questions and your interest in PotlatchDeltic. To recap, our year-to-date 2022
results are very strong. We look forward to providing updates on the performance of our leverage to lumber strategy, our integration at
CatchMark and our progress on increasing shareholder value.
 
Operator
This concludes today's conference. You may now disconnect.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.