CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
Alfonzo Leon
Global Medical REIT Inc. - CIO
 
Jeffery M. Busch
Global Medical REIT Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
 
Robert J. Kiernan
Global Medical REIT Inc. - CFO & Treasurer
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
Austin Todd Wurschmidt
KeyBanc Capital Markets Inc., Research Division - VP
 
Bryan Anthony Maher
B. Riley Securities, Inc., Research Division - MD
 
Robert Chapman Stevenson
Janney Montgomery Scott LLC, Research Division - MD, Head of Real Estate Research & Senior Research
Analyst
 
Stephen C. Swett
ICR, LLC - MD
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Greetings, and welcome to the Global Medical REIT Third Quarter 2022 Earnings Conference Call. (Operator Instructions) As a reminder,
this conference is being recorded.
It is now my pleasure to introduce your host, Steve Swett, Investor Relations. Thank you. You may begin.
 
Stephen C. Swett
ICR, LLC - MD
Thank you. Good morning, everyone, and welcome to Global Medical REIT's Third Quarter 2022 Earnings Conference Call. On the call
today are Jeff Busch, Chief Executive Officer; Alfonzo Leon, Chief Investment Officer; and Bob Kiernan, Chief Financial Officer.
Please note the use of forward-looking statements by the company on this conference call. Statements made on this call may include
statements that are not historical facts and are considered forward-looking. The company intends these forward-looking statements to
be covered by the safe harbor provisions for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995
and is making this statement for purpose of complying with those safe harbor provisions. Furthermore, actual results may differ
materially from those described in the forward-looking statements and will be affected by a variety of risks and factors that are beyond
the company's control, including, without limitation, those contained in the company's 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021, and
its other SEC filings. The company assumes no obligation to update publicly any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new
information, future events or otherwise.
Additionally, on this call, the company may refer to certain non-GAAP financial measures such as funds from operations, adjusted funds
from operations, EBITDAre and adjusted EBITDAre. You can find a tabular reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to the
most currently comparable GAAP numbers in the company's earnings release and filings with the SEC. Additional information may be
found on the Investor Relations page of the company's website at www.globalmedicalreit.com.
I would now like to turn the call over to Jeff Busch, Chief Executive Officer of Global Medical REIT. Jeff?
 
Jeffery M. Busch
Global Medical REIT Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Thank you, Steve. Good morning, and thank you for joining our third quarter 2022 earnings call. Our high-quality portfolio of
needs-based health care facilities continues to produce excellent results in the third quarter with 97% occupancy and a stable cash flow.
We achieved an 18.1% year-over-year increase in total revenue to $35.4 million driven primarily by our acquisition activity over the past
year, including a $6.8 million gain from the sale of a property. Our net income attributable to common shareholders for the third quarter
of 2022 was $8.1 million or $0.12 per share compared to $3.7 million or $0.06 per share in the third quarter of 2021. FFO in the third
quarter was $0.23 per share and unit, in line with last year. And our AFFO per share increased by $0.01 to $0.25 per share and unit
compared to the third quarter of 2021.
As we have discussed, the acquisition environment for our target assets continues to evolve. The Federal Reserve's focus on fighting
inflation has led to a material increase in interest rates this year, impacting the marginal cost of capital for buyers. Potential sellers,
meanwhile, are adapting more gradually to the new reality, resulting in an acquisition market that has slowed significantly. This is very
much in line with what we have seen in the past cycles when the bid-ask spread was widened. We are hopeful to see some soaring in
early 2023 but it is difficult to predict.
That said, in the third quarter, we continue to find attractive acquisitions that meet our quality and yield targets, closing 5 acquisitions for
$51 million. Our average cap rate for the third quarter acquisitions was 7.1%, but this was impacted by one of our acquisitions, which was
only 74% occupied but has substantial upside. I would also note that the other 2 acquisitions that closed in September had a cap rate
high in the 7s and low 8s. These transactions more fully represent negotiations that took place after a significant interest rate increase
had started.
In August, we expanded our credit facility with $150 million term loan and extended the term of our revolver. We also entered into
interest rate swaps that fixed the interest rate on our new term loan through its maturity, bringing our fixed rate debt ratio to
approximately 80% of our total debt.
Looking forward, we will be seemly selective in pursuing any incremental acquisitions until cap rates better reflect the higher cost of
capital. In the meantime, we are conducting a strategic review to identify properties that we can sell with a focus on properties where we
have added value since acquisition by lease extensions, leasing up vacancies or upgrading credit, assets that can be considered core
properties.
We expect to use any proceeds from the sales to reduce our outstanding debt, increasing our dry powder to be in the position to restart
acquisitions when market conditions improve. We will provide more color on the proceeds we expect to generate and the reduction in
leverage we are targeting as we move ahead. But we believe that this is a prudent course of action to take amidst this highly volatile
economic and capital markets environment.
Overall, I am pleased with our third quarter results and want to thank the team for their hard work and contributions to our results.
With that, I'd like to turn the call over to Alfonzo to discuss our investment activity in more detail.
 
Alfonzo Leon
Global Medical REIT Inc. - CIO
Thank you, Jeff. As Jeff mentioned, the market for medical facilities is in flux as higher interest rates are impacting pricing. We have been
through cycles such as this before and know that the transaction market typically takes time to fully reflect these changes. We will
continue to source opportunities that make sense but remain disciplined and prudent as the market evolves.
During the third quarter and by mid-September, we completed 5 acquisitions, containing just under 250,000 leasable square feet for an
aggregate investment of $50.8 million at a weighted average cap rate of 7.1%. Consistent with the prior quarter, our third quarter
acquisitions included some vacancy where we believe the lease-up potential will benefit us in the long term.
These acquisitions included: a 110,800 square foot medical office portfolio in Toledo, Ohio for a purchase price of $17.2 million with a cap
rate of 6.9% at 84% occupancy, which is anchored by University of Toledo Physicians, and a 12,000 square foot Bon Secours Surgery
Center; a 22,600 square foot medical office building in Lake Geneva, Wisconsin for a purchase price of $6.1 million with a cap rate of
7.8% at 100% occupancy, which is 66% leased to Advocate Aurora Health; a 35,900 square foot medical office and retail center in
Glenview, Illinois for a purchase price of $8.7 million with a cap rate of 5.8% at 74% occupancy with the tenancy focused on dental,
optometry and wellness; a 55,000 square foot medical office portfolio in Canandaigua, New York for a purchase price of $13.8 million
with a cap rate of 7.6% at 100% occupancy, which is adjacent to the University of Rochester campus and is anchored by the hospital's
primary care group and by Western New York Medical; a 23,000 square foot medical office building in Hermitage, Pennsylvania for a
purchase price of $5.1 million with a cap rate of 8.2% and 100% leased to Steward Health for over 4 years.
With nearly $150 million of acquisitions closed so far in 2022, we will remain disciplined as we look at incremental growth for the balance
of 2022 and into 2023. While we continually assess potential acquisition opportunities, based on current market conditions, we don't
have any acquisitions under contract and currently don't expect to close on any additional acquisitions for the remainder of 2022.
With regards to dispositions, in the third quarter, we sold our medical office building in Germantown, Tennessee, receiving gross
proceeds of $17.9 million, resulting in a gain on sale of $6.8 million.
I'd like now to turn the call over to Bob to discuss our financial results. Bob?
 
Robert J. Kiernan
Global Medical REIT Inc. - CFO & Treasurer
Thank you, Alfonzo. GMRE continues to benefit from strong relationships with our tenants and solid portfolio performance. At the end of
the third quarter 2022, our portfolio consisted of gross investments in real estate of $1.5 billion and included 4.9 million of total leasable
square feet, 96.8% occupancy, 6.4 years of weighted average lease term, 4.7x rent coverage with 2.1% weighted average contractual rent
escalations.
In the third quarter, we achieved an 18.1% year-over-year increase in total revenue to $35.4 million driven primarily by our acquisition
activity over the past year. On a same-store basis, excluding cash basis leases, our third quarter revenues were up $344,000 or 1.4%
compared to the third quarter of 2021.
Our total expenses for the third quarter of 2022 were $32.1 million compared to $24.6 million in the prior year quarter. The increase was
primarily due to higher operating and depreciation and amortization expenses due to our larger portfolio, the multi-tenant nature of the
majority of our acquisitions of the past year and higher interest expenses.
G&A expenses for the third quarter of 2022 were $4 million compared to $3.9 million in the third quarter of 2021. Within our current
quarter G&A expenses, note that our stock compensation costs in the quarter were just over $1 million, and our cash G&A costs were $2.9
million. Looking ahead, we expect our Q4 G&A expenses to be between $4 million and $4.2 million.
Our operating expenses for the third quarter were $6.7 million compared to $4 million in the prior year quarter, with the increase in these
expenses being driven by the growth in our portfolio and, to a lesser degree, the impact of gross leases. Regarding these third quarter
2022 expenses, $5 million related to net leases where the company recognized a comparable amount of expense recovery revenue and
$1.4 million related to gross leases.
Our interest expense in the third quarter was $7 million compared to $4.8 million in the comparable quarter of last year, reflecting both
higher debt balances and increased interest rates.
Including a $6.8 million gain from the sale of property, net income attributable to common stockholders for the third quarter of 2022
was $8.1 million or $0.12 per share compared to $3.7 million or $0.06 per share in the third quarter of 2021.
FFO in the third quarter was $16.2 million or $0.23 per share and unit compared to $15.8 million or $0.23 per share and unit in the third
quarter of 2021. AFFO in the third quarter was $17.1 million or $0.25 per share and unit compared to $16.4 million or $0.24 per share and
unit in the third quarter of 2021.
Moving on to the balance sheet. As of September 30, 2022, our gross investment in real estate was approximately $1.5 billion, which is
up $171 million from a year earlier. We did not issue any shares of common stock under our ATM in the quarter.
Regarding our debt, in August, we amended our credit facility to add a new $150 million term loan component with the maturity of
February 1, 2028, extend the maturity date of the revolver component to August 2026 with 2 6-month company-controlled extension
options and, lastly, convert all LIBOR-based loans under the facility to SOFR-based loans.
Immediately following the amendment, we entered into $150 million of forward starting interest rate swaps that commenced in October
2022 and mature in January 2028 that fixed the SOFR component on the new term loan through its maturity at 2.54%. At our current
leverage, and including the 10 basis point spread adjustment that's associated with our conversion to SOFR-based loans, our interest
rate on the new term loan is 4.15%.
At September 30, 2022, we had approximately $703 million of gross debt, our leverage ratio was 47.6% and our weighted average
interest rate was 3.9%. The current unutilized borrowing capacity under the credit facility is $244 million. Additionally, as of quarter end,
the weighted average term of our debt was 4.2 years, up from 3.8 years at June 30.
Relative to our leasing activities, with a modest increase in occupancy this quarter, our asset management team continues to make
progress in our vacancies and upcoming lease expirations. As we look ahead to 2023 lease expirations, note that more than half of this
ABR relates to 2 single-tenant facilities that are progressing well towards renewals. Additionally, behind these 2 large expirations
currently, there are no individually material leases that we don't expect to renew.
Overall, despite challenging market conditions, we continue to believe we are well positioned to execute on our business strategy and
look forward to sharing our progress with you through the balance of this year and into 2023.
This concludes our prepared remarks. Operator, please open the call for questions.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) Our first question comes from the line of Austin Wurschmidt with KeyBanc.
 
Austin Todd Wurschmidt
KeyBanc Capital Markets Inc., Research Division - VP
Jeff, I know you're still going through the strategic review process for potential asset sales. But as we think about the range of proceeds, I
mean, is your long-term debt target of 40% to 45% debt to gross assets a reasonable range to assume you could reach within kind of
these planned sales? And I'm also curious how you're thinking about the cap rate range on future sales.
 
Jeffery M. Busch
Global Medical REIT Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Okay. The cap rate range is a big differential between what so many people want to buy in, what they call, the core assets and our
secondary market and that. So we're looking at possibly $50-plus million sale to hopefully be in the low 6s. These are the properties we
may have been able to sell in the mid-5s a little while ago. But our target still is to start moving towards that $40 million to $45 million.
We went up above that target at the time that we could have sold stock in the market, and then there was a change in the stock price.
And we're not selling stock at this time, we think the stock is way too low. So the target is still $40 million to $45 million with sometimes
a jump above just to do acquisitions.
But it's interesting, we have been able to take properties, and by shorter-term leases, extend them to longer-term leases. Higher credits
then come into these properties, and suddenly, we're at a whole different level and they're very attractive into the market. So we can't
guarantee we're going to sell, but we're looking into the market of selling some properties to reduce. Then right now, we have somewhat
of a pause on buying because if we buy now, we're probably not going to get the best rates. We see realization coming into the market in
our type of markets and our type of properties, which is secondary markets and several primary markets or places that make money, but
we see that coming back.
And there's reasons people have mortgages coming up. They have retirements. The same reason they always sell is the same reason
they're talking to us still, but we see the market coming back up. And in our valuation of those, we have to be accretive at the time and
we have to be able to take that down. So there's a possibility of selling something and then later on buying with maybe a 200-point basis
gain. But in the meantime, to be conservative during this difficult time, it'd be nice to lower our debt ratio. Even though our float is at the
target that we went to at 20%, that would also lower the float at the time.
 
Austin Todd Wurschmidt
KeyBanc Capital Markets Inc., Research Division - VP
Yes, that makes sense. And you referenced kind of sales in the $50 million-plus range, moving roughly 75 basis points. I'm curious, is
that fair across the broader portfolio? Or have you seen a disproportionate move on deals inside $50 million or due to other
characteristics, whether it be lease term, et cetera?
 
Jeffery M. Busch
Global Medical REIT Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
I'll let Alfonzo answer that. He's been in the market. Alfonzo?
 
Alfonzo Leon
Global Medical REIT Inc. - CIO
Yes. That sounds to me more like a question of market, is that like you're just trying to get a sense of what we see in the market.
 
Austin Todd Wurschmidt
KeyBanc Capital Markets Inc., Research Division - VP
Yes, just in terms of moves in cap rates. Jeff alluded to what was sort of mid-5% cap rate deal is now trading in the low 6s. And I'm just
curious if that is a fair move across the board or if deals inside $50 million plus have moved even wider than that?
 
Alfonzo Leon
Global Medical REIT Inc. - CIO
Sure. Yes. So at this point, it's pretty clear that the market has moved up at least 75 to 100 basis points across the board regardless of
quality location. And in some instances, it's moved up higher than that.
 
Austin Todd Wurschmidt
KeyBanc Capital Markets Inc., Research Division - VP
Got it. That's helpful. And then just one last one for me, I was curious if you could provide any update on sort of pipeline health systems,
and what's sort of the latest there and whether or not they remain current on their rent.
 
Robert J. Kiernan
Global Medical REIT Inc. - CFO & Treasurer
Yes. Sure, Austin. So in terms of pipeline, I think a couple of things to note. I mean they're going through the bankruptcy process, and
they still have some time to decide if they're going to accept or reject our lease. So we're waiting for that decision. Although at this time,
we don't believe that our lease will be rejected, it's a below-market rental rate for this type of property. And in terms of payment, while
they're going through the bankruptcy process, the timing on payment is more determined by the bankruptcy rules than anything else. So
we'll know more once they've decided to accept or reject our lease. But at this time, again, we don't believe the lease is going to be
rejected and we expect once those mechanisms take place that everything would again continue to get paid as normal.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from the line of Rob Stevenson with Janney.
 
Robert Chapman Stevenson
Janney Montgomery Scott LLC, Research Division - MD, Head of Real Estate Research & Senior
Research Analyst
Obviously, paying down debt is a good thing and a good use of proceeds, et cetera. But how are you guys viewing the preferred? At 7.5%,
one could argue that that's your most expensive debt and that a lot of times, you're not getting credit for that as equity. How are you
viewing that piece in the capital stack if you do have disposition proceeds to deploy?
 
Robert J. Kiernan
Global Medical REIT Inc. - CFO & Treasurer
So Rob, I think we certainly consider it in terms of potential of we now have the ability to repay it. But from a leverage perspective in the
credit facility, it does count as capital. And so when we think about our pricing grid and the impact on our pricing grid, we have to be
cognizant of not moving in the pricing grid above that 50% level if we take out the preferred. So I think we have to, again, be thoughtful
around that in terms of how we would use proceeds from any sales. So it's on the table because the optionality moves to us but I think,
again, just balancing out the impact that it might have on our pricing grid and the credit facility.
 
Jeffery M. Busch
Global Medical REIT Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Rob, let me just add something. It was sort of funny because about a year ago, we couldn't wait until we could take down the preferred
based upon our equity. We were planning on using equity to take down the preferred, lower our debt level, get rid of the preferred, make
money on that. But the circumstances have changed. We always consider taking down the preferred at some time.
 
Robert Chapman Stevenson
Janney Montgomery Scott LLC, Research Division - MD, Head of Real Estate Research & Senior
Research Analyst
Okay. I mean, I guess then that leads into another question. I mean, the stock has bounced off the $7 low but still trades at an incredibly
high implied cap rate on the existing portfolio of assets. How narrow do you have to be between buying your own portfolio versus buying
an external asset to make that math work? I mean if you're trading at, call it, a 10 or 12 implied cap rate and you could buy stuff in the
marketplace with an 8, is that good enough given the additional sort of revenue and dropping down to the bottom line to make that
work? Or do you really need to be in a much narrower band from your own sort of stock price and the implied value of your own assets to
make external acquisitions work for you?
 
Jeffery M. Busch
Global Medical REIT Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Yes. That's a very good question, and that's something we look at all the time. We feel our stock is too low right now. I guess others do
also. But we think it got extremely low for the dividend we given, the good balance sheet we have to pay our dividend and continue to pay
our dividend. That, we're not worried about. Then going back and growing again. We need to find assets that we feel are accretive. How
much accretive, I'm not sure at this time. I mean, we used to be able to do 2, 3 points in accretive, and I think we'll get back to that.
But we need to buy assets that are accretive, and it includes the interest rate that we have to pay on taking down this money and includes
the cost of capital. So there may be a little bit of pause in this until the market sort of catches up with this and others. But on the other
hand, we've seen some pretty desperate sellers who have mortgages that they're going out there, and they have to pay their mortgages
or refinance them and other things. there may be some opportunities out there to be accretive. I think we need to have a pause and let
the market go up a bit also.
 
Robert Chapman Stevenson
Janney Montgomery Scott LLC, Research Division - MD, Head of Real Estate Research & Senior
Research Analyst
Okay. And then last one for me, what's the plan for that? I think you said it was 74% occupied assets that you acquired, what's the timing
on that?
 
Jeffery M. Busch
Global Medical REIT Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Yes. I got to tell you, the greatest thing that has happened to our organization is we built up a very strong asset management
department. So therefore, not only have we been able to re-lease properties, because we bought some with shorter leases, then we turn
around and make a much longer leases, but we then went into the business, like in Fairfax, Virginia, we bought it basically 80%
occupied, and then we went in and very quickly we're able to lease up. Not a lot of REITs do this because they don't want vacancy to show
up on their numbers, it's sort of manufacturing their occupancy. We feel that we have strong occupancy and we could buy some vacancy
and increase it. So we've done that with several of our assets where we're now buying vacancy, getting a really good deal on the property.
And when we do it, we gain 1 point to 2 points on that.
So that's the same type of strategy we have on each one of our properties. If there's vacancy in a property, we have to feel strongly. Like
what happens is sometimes the owner does not give renovation allowances or anything where they don't pay broker fees. We found that
in Fairfax, that they didn't like to pay broker fees. We came in, we paid broker fees, we basically filled up the place. It's just quirks in some
of the ownership because a lot of them are doctors or medical people who just don't know how to run property properly. So we found a
real niche in that to add value to a property. So therefore, sometimes you'll see these occupancies down lower, but we feel strongly
before we go in that we could rent these up.
 
Robert Chapman Stevenson
Janney Montgomery Scott LLC, Research Division - MD, Head of Real Estate Research & Senior
Research Analyst
Okay. So this is use your internal people to manage this asset better and lease it up rather than going into it knowing that you had a
tenant in your back pocket or something like that or you were going to redevelop it or something like that, it's just a lease-up story over
the next few quarters?
 
Jeffery M. Busch
Global Medical REIT Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
And sometimes, we have a tenant, we have a whole bunch of tenants that are national tenants that are looking for space. We contact
them before we buy. Sometimes, we already have somebody interested.
 
Alfonzo Leon
Global Medical REIT Inc. - CIO
Yes. And I would add to, like if you look at the completed acquisitions table, and I'll point to Prosperity Plaza in Fairfax, Virginia, if you
compare that with the previous quarter report, I mean, we had that at like a 6.4% and now it's 7.3%, just pointing to the lease-up that's
happened at that property. And just a little bit more color on Glenview, when we bought that, we knew that there was going to be a roll
in the near term. That was part of the opportunity. Long term, it's a fantastic location. It's near a retail hub and a transportation center,
and it's got a really nice mix of tenants that are focused on dental, optometry, wellness. And in our diligence, we spoke with local leasing
experts that confirmed what we believe would be the case, that this is a property that we could fill up in fairly short time. So it was a
near-term roll, and that's reflected in the occupancy that you're seeing.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from the line of Bryan Maher with B. Riley Securities.
 
Bryan Anthony Maher
B. Riley Securities, Inc., Research Division - MD
Most of my questions have already been asked, so just kind of some follow-ups to those. On the Pipeline Health asset, if worse comes to
worst and there's an issue there, it's my understanding that's a pretty good asset, how quickly do you think you could replace the tenant if
you had to?
 
Jeffery M. Busch
Global Medical REIT Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Yes, it's a good question. I'll just give you some of the fundamentals. Because Pipeline was an operator, we came in and bought this
property at a tremendous discount. It's 14 acres, 5 miles from Downtown Denver and a very active area where it's really the only hospital
there. Right now, with the lease increases, it's at $10 a square foot, typically, a hospital at that level and others would be about $30 a
square foot. Per bed, new hospitals are about $1 million. Buying a hospital could be $500,000, around that. This is $100,000 a bed.
That's very good economics. They were doing fine on this. They were taking fees from here and other things. So we expect that this is an
asset.
Systems have asked us questions about this asset in the past. So either they're going to run it or they could sell it. But we still think this is
a pretty good asset based upon the rent roll and based upon that a lot of money has gone into it by the tenant to upgrade it and set up
the systems. Their business is worth something there. So I don't think they're going to walk away from a 15-year below-market lease, way
below market lease.
 
Bryan Anthony Maher
B. Riley Securities, Inc., Research Division - MD
Got it. And maybe for Alfonzo, with interest rates and cap rates moving around quite a bit, what would it take, just in your history in this
business, from a cap rate upward spike for you guys to say, hey, look, we're going to reengage here because we don't want to turn down
these cap rates? Or is it just simply a spread game and cap rates could go up 300 basis points, and you don't care because your cost of
capital has gone up that much, and you just got to pass?
 
Alfonzo Leon
Global Medical REIT Inc. - CIO
Well, so I mean there's 2 questions and 2 parts to that question, but they're kind of intermingled. My sense of the market right now is that
it's still in transition. I would characterize the market started changing slowly, but then in mid-September, there was clearly capitulation.
There was a lot of acknowledgment that the pricing for a medical office across the board have changed pretty dramatically. And so
there's been a lot of movement in the last couple of months in terms of cap rate. And I'm inclined to think that the dust hasn't settled yet.
And my overall sense of it is in 2023, I think there's going to be a good opportunity to buy medical office. But given our goals of growing
this company and doing it in a way that is accretive, we're always mindful of our cost of capital and we always want to grow accretively,
so we can't ignore that. We have to be mindful of where capital markets are and where our stock is trading.
 
Operator
There are no further questions. I'd like to hand the call back to management for closing remarks.
 
Jeffery M. Busch
Global Medical REIT Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Thank you, everybody, for joining this call. We feel like we had an excellent quarter, going to $0.25 AFFO. And thank you for following us.
I appreciate it. Have a good day.
 
Operator
Ladies and gentlemen, this does conclude today's teleconference. Thank you for your participation. You may disconnect your lines at this
time, and have a wonderful day.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
©2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.