CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
Alicia Swift
Anywhere Real Estate Inc. - SVP of Financial Planning, Analysis & IR
 
Charlotte C. Simonelli
Anywhere Real Estate Inc. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
 
Ryan M. Schneider
Anywhere Real Estate Inc. - CEO, President & Director
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
John Robert Campbell
Stephens Inc., Research Division - MD & Research Analyst
 
Justin Ian Ages
Joh. Berenberg, Gossler & Co. KG, Research Division - Analyst
 
Matthew Adrien Bouley
Barclays Bank PLC, Research Division - VP
 
Ryan McKeveny
Zelman & Associates LLC - Director of Research
 
Thomas Patrick McJoynt-Griffith
Keefe, Bruyette, & Woods, Inc., Research Division - Assistant Analyst
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Good morning, and welcome to the Anywhere Real Estate Third Quarter 2022 Earnings Conference Call via webcast. Today's call is being
recorded, and a written transcript will be made available in the Investor Information section of the company's website tomorrow. A
webcast replay will also be made available on the company's website. At this time, I'd like to turn the conference over to Anywhere Senior
Vice President Alicia Swift. Please go ahead, Alicia.
 
Alicia Swift
Anywhere Real Estate Inc. - SVP of Financial Planning, Analysis & IR
Thank you, Chris. Good morning, and welcome to the Third Quarter 2022 Earnings Conference Call for Anywhere Real Estate. On the call
with me today are Anywhere CEO and President Ryan Schneider; and Chief Financial Officer Charlotte Simonelli. As shown on Slide 3 of
the presentation, the company will be making statements about its future results and other forward-looking statements during this call.
These statements are based on the current expectations and the current economic environment. Forward-looking statements and
projections are inherently subject to significant economic, competitive litigation, regulatory and other uncertainties, and contingencies,
many of which are beyond the control of management, including, among others, rising inflation and mortgage rates, constrained
inventory, declining affordability, and other macroeconomic concerns as well as the impact of the foregoing on consumer demand. 
Actual results may differ materially from those expressed or implied in the forward-looking statements. For those who listen to this
rebroadcast of this presentation, we remind you that the remarks made herein are as of today, October 27, and have not been updated
subsequent to the initial earnings call. Important assumptions and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from
those in the forward-looking statements are specified in our earnings release issued today as well as in our annual and quarterly SEC
filings. Now I will turn the call over to our CEO and President, Ryan Schneider.
 
Ryan M. Schneider
Anywhere Real Estate Inc. - CEO, President & Director
Thank you, Alicia. We delivered meaningful Q3 profitability even in a clearly challenging housing market. We began to see the
competitive environment shift in our favor and our position of strength allows us to invest for growth in our core business and to simplify
the consumer experience of buying and selling a home. The biggest challenge today is the rapid deterioration of the housing market. Our
Q3 transaction volume was down 17%, consistent with our down 10% to 20% estimate. But the market is, unfortunately, worsening
beyond that. based off what we're seeing in the market today, including our September and October open contracts, we're seeing more
like over 25% volume reductions driven by lower unit sales, and recent third-party forecasts predict lower 2023 volume, driven by a
decline in unit sales versus their 2022 forecast. 
Now the macroeconomic drivers of this falloff in housing activity are not a mystery, with mortgage rates more than doubling to now at or
above 7%, affordability challenges given the rise in home prices, and economic uncertainty anchored in high inflation. And beyond those
macro factors, I can't emphasize enough how the continued lack of inventory contributes to this drop-off. Many homeowners are locked
into their current homes with low mortgage rates, creating a barrier to new supply coming onto the market. And even before mortgage
rates increased, we already had a lack of inventory problem, especially in the highest-demand entry-level part of the market and in many
of the more attractive destination geographies. So while a challenging macro housing outlook for the rest of '22 and 2023 is clearly
disappointing, we are confronting it head-on and making a series of moves to both deliver financially and to expand our competitive
differentiation. Before I talk more about that future, let me share our Q3 results. 
We earned $166 million of operating EBITDA in the quarter. Our business delivered well above that number, but it was reduced by us
taking several legal accruals in the quarter. These earnings are a powerful financial result on both an absolute basis and relative to our
competition. We delivered $1.8 billion in revenue. Our transaction volume was down 17% year-over-year, consistent with the range we
estimated during Q2 earnings. Our owned brokerage volume performed a bit better than our franchise business. Our luxury leadership
position was one of the more important drivers of that difference as we consistently saw less decline in the 750 and up the segment of
the market in both our transactions and in our listings.
Second, we are seeing pretty meaningful geographic variation with about 25% volume declines in the west, but only kind of high
single-digit declines in places like the Midwest and the Northeast. And we're also seeing the same geographic variations in the dynamics
of the market. So taking Cobalt banker as an example, average days on the market in Q3 increased 5% versus the prior year to 20 days
overall. While average days on the market stayed flat in the Northeast but increased by 11 days in the West. But to put it in context, that
20 average days on the market is still substantially lower than more normalized years like 2019, when it was 30 days. 
Now finally, through all this, we remain laser-focused on costs. As we've seen the housing market worsen, we increased our cost
reduction even more during Q3, as Charlotte will discuss later in the call. Now looking forward, as we head into a worsening housing
market, we continue to be proactive in preparing for that environment. So first, our commitment to increasing our efficiency is absolutely
at the top of the list. Not only have we focused on cost reduction every year for the past 4 years, but in both Q2 and here again in Q3, we
increased our cost reduction for this year as we saw the market deteriorate. Second, our Investor Day highlighted the scale advantages
and the growth opportunity from integrating our brokerage title and mortgage services. There are also speed and synergy opportunities
from that integration, and we have begun operationally integrating our Cubo Banker-owned brokerage with our title and mortgage JV,
which should pay off in both faster service delivery and greater efficiency. 
Third, we remain very disciplined with our investments. We continue to selectively invest to grow and to improve the consumer
experience. And as we've seen the market worsening, we have pulled back on some investments where the ROI isn't as attractive in a
weaker market. And the largest examples of that will show up in our lower marketing expenses and our reduced capital expenditures.
And fourth, as you know from our SEC filings, there are a large number of industry class action lawsuits as well as additional litigation
facing the company. 2 have trial dates set in the next 6 months. All these cases are complex and constantly evolving. And while we're
vigorously defending these lawsuits and believe we have substantial defenses, we increased our legal accruals for several matters in Q3.
And then, fifth and finally, we are proactively redeeming the outstanding balance on our 2023 notes in November. 
Now on the growth side, we see the competitive environment improving to our benefit, and we are working hard to create competitive
differentiation in this current part of the market so that we emerge even stronger on both an absolute and a relative basis as the market
improves. We like how our products and technology, our value proposition, and our profitability are making a difference. So to start, we
really like our franchise results and how we're leveraging the better competitive environment to outperform 2021 on 2 critical metrics.
As you saw at our Investor Day, we continue to have success growing through franchise sales. We are running ahead of last year's
numbers, including our Corken franchise expanding into its 50th market since launching 2 years ago. And one thing we didn't discuss at
Investor Day is renewals. And both last year and this year featured over $1 billion of gross commission income renewals through Q3, with
2022 pacing slightly ahead of 2021. Second, we saw a better competitive environment in our owned brokerage recruiting and retention.
We analyzed MLS data to determine everyone in the industry's net gain of agent production from recruiting and retention, and we were
really excited for our own brokerage business to be at the top of the list across the industry for the quarter. Our relocation business
continues to gain share by signing several new clients, including a global Fortune 25 account, and expanding services with over 50
existing clients. 
And our current successes are driven by the great talent at our company, as we were just recognized again this year by Forbes as the
world's best employer. I'm proud we were able to achieve solid financial results in the quarter. Going forward, our most important focus is
on the challenging environment ahead, executing cost savings, making prudent growth investments, and capitalizing on the better
competitive dynamics to set us up for even stronger outcomes and greater competitive differentiation as the market improves. Now I will
turn it over to Charlotte to discuss more details about Q3, and then I'll come back at the end to make a few more comments on the longer
term.
 
Charlotte C. Simonelli
Anywhere Real Estate Inc. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
Good morning, everyone. As Ryan said, we are proud of our results delivery, and we are well-equipped to navigate today's environment.
Our competitive differentiation is driven by our well-established profitability, strong balance sheet and liquidity, and our proven track
record to deliver efficiencies in our cost structure. Last quarter, we announced an additional $70 million of cost savings, putting our
full-year target north of $140 million. We are on track to realize the entire amount this year, plus incremental new actions, which
increased our full-year 2022 savings target to over $150 million. We expect about 1/3 of the additional $80 million of savings will be
permanent, and this is on top of the $240 million of permanent savings we have taken out of the business over the past 3 years. 
The remaining portion of the savings in 2022 are temporary and were actioned in response to temporary shifts in the housing market.
With some of the cost savings actions coming much later in the year, the 2023 run rate benefit for those actions is worth about $70
million. We are also beginning to identify more structural savings tied to the strategy we shared with you at Investor Day, and I will
provide further information about our full-year 2023 savings target in next quarter's call.
The integration of our brokerage and title operations is another great example of how we are changing the way we operate to make us
faster, more efficient and to deliver on the future we outlined during Investor Day. These businesses represent about 70% of our cost
base and the lion's share of our customer interactions across the business, and we are excited by this opportunity. As we integrate these
businesses, we plan to report the brokerage and title Financial segments combined together in our full-year 2022 results and going
forward. With that context, I will now briefly highlight our Q3 financial results. 
Q3 revenue was $1.8 billion, down 17%, in line with our transaction volume decline. Q3 operating EBITDA was $166 million, down due to
lower transaction volume, higher agent commission costs, and a decline in the title, offset in part by favorable relocation earnings driven
by strong volume growth. Our results were also impacted by the legal accruals Ryan referred to earlier. Cash on hand at the end of Q3
was $272 million, and free cash flow was $99 million. We ended Q3 with a senior secured leverage ratio of 0.02x and a net debt leverage
ratio of 3.8x. Free cash flow in the quarter was down versus the prior year due to lower earnings and working capital timing. Our
Anywhere Brands business, which includes leads and relocation, generated $202 million in operating EBITDA in the quarter. Operating
EBITDA decreased primarily due to lower revenue related to transaction volume declines, partially offset by a decrease in operating and
marketing costs. 
Our relocation business substantially outperformed 2021, driven by strong client initiations. Our Anywhere Advisors business generated
negative $1 million in operating EBITDA in the quarter and $96 million before the transfer of intercompany royalties and marketing fees
paid to our franchise business. Our agent base was up 7% year-over-year like-for-like, with all 3 brands delivering agent growth.
Commission split increases were up 215 basis points year-over-year but down 15 basis points in absolute terms versus Q2 and continued
to sequentially moderate as expected. 
We are seeing a recent positive change in the competitive market in what it is taking to attract and retain agents. And if this dynamic
continues, we expect the split environment to improve over time. This split moderation will also be driven by continued volume declines
as commission tables reset. And this will be partially offset by the amortization of previous agent investments as well as agent mix as we
expect our highest producers, who are in the highest split rates, to continue to drive more of the volume. Anywhere Integrated Services
delivered $9 million in operating EBITDA in Q3.
Operating EBITDA declined $45 million year-over-year due to lower resale and refinance volumes, lower earnings due to the tighter
underwriter sale, and lower mortgage JV earnings as seen across the entire mortgage industry driven by massively rising rates and
margin compression. We believe our profitability is a competitive advantage. We are pleased with the progress we have made on our
balance sheet. We have a long-dated maturity stack and have lowered our cost of capital. We have $272 million of cash on the balance
sheet. As Ryan mentioned, we are executing on our promise to address the 2023 notes. We opportunistically repurchased about $7
million in Q3 in the open market, and we issued a notice to redeem the remaining 2023 notes on November 17. 
We will use revolver borrowings and cash on hand to address these notes. And after that, we have limited debt maturities until 2026.
Looking forward, we will continue to balance these priorities with the impacts of the broader economy and our need to prudently invest in
the business to advance our goal to make the transaction process simpler for consumers. In Q3, our volume was down 17%, consistent
with our down 10% to 20% estimate. But the market is, unfortunately, worsening beyond that. And based on what we see today, our
current view on transaction volume for Q4 is down over 25%.
The further deterioration of volume from our previous guidance, combined with the legal accruals, as is below our previous EBITDA
guidance. We do not plan to give new guidance at this point due to the high degree of macro volatility. We continue to make decisions
that set us up for the near term while also remaining committed to our long-term strategy, balancing the emphasis on cost efficiencies
and prudent investments designed to drive long-term value. We believe this balance, along with our size, scale, and cost discipline
positions us well for long-term success. I will now turn the call over to Ryan for some closing remarks.
 
Ryan M. Schneider
Anywhere Real Estate Inc. - CEO, President & Director
Thank you, Charlotte. Well, it's clearly a volatile and challenging housing market right now, and in the near future. I like Anywhere Real
Estate's demonstrated ability to deliver meaningful profitability, cost discipline, prudent growth investments, and our potential for
differentiation in an improving competitive environment. I still believe the long-term housing market outlook is pretty good, driven in
large part by positive demographics, strong consumer balance sheets, and strong demand for housing.
But today and in the near future, we're clearly facing a tough part of the cycle. We believe we're well positioned for the future, taking a
proactive approach to confront the challenging near-term market and continuing to look ahead to grow our business, simplify the
transaction for the consumer and create competitive differentiation. We believe we've got the scale, innovation capabilities, and the right
focus on the future to navigate the tough parts of the cycle and position anywhere for greater success in better housing markets down the
road. With that, we will take your questions.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) Our first question is from Ryan McKeveny with Zelman & Associates.
 
Ryan McKeveny
Zelman & Associates LLC - Director of Research
Charlotte, I know you mentioned you'll get into more detail on the cost side of things for '23 next quarter. But can you help us think about
the process of potentially temporary cost savings becoming permanent or becoming kept out of the business longer. And I ask because
Ryan, you mentioned there's many that expect next year could be, in fact, worse than this year. So I'm just curious, how much of the cost
saves that are coming out this year, should we expect to remain out of the business? Is there a level of like if the market is still down, if
transaction volume is still down, then those temporary costs stay out? Or, on the other hand, what would cause those to come back into
the business as expenses next year?
 
Charlotte C. Simonelli
Anywhere Real Estate Inc. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
Ryan, it's a great question. And so how I think about it and a good analog is what we had in COVID, right? So when the volume was
down, the costs were out, and then you saw a little bit of quarter-by-quarter variation, especially year-over-year like as we started adding
those back when volume completely boomerang back. To that point, if volumes are still down next year, I would fully expect that some of
these temporary cost savings remain temporary cost savings in line with whatever the market is delivering for us. So it really will depend
on the volumes. And good examples of that is so marketing expenses. Lots of industries, lots of companies tied their marketing expenses
to volumes. So that's highly variable. Some employee-related costs, just even processing costs, those definitely vary with the market. So
absolutely, we would expect those to stay out-tied with the volumes that we're seeing if those volumes decline into 2023.
 
Ryan McKeveny
Zelman & Associates LLC - Director of Research
And the second one, just capital allocation, and I know this is also kind of a longer-term thought process, but obviously, the near-term
focus is on the redemption of the notes, as you've mentioned in the past. But how are you thinking about or how should we be thinking
about your focus between things like share repurchase, even M&A opportunities as the market softens? Investment in the business. And
generally, assuming cash flows remain positive, how do you think about allocating that capital across the various opportunities going
forward?
 
Charlotte C. Simonelli
Anywhere Real Estate Inc. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
Another great question. We're committed to our capital allocation priorities, but here's a way of thinking about it. We did more share
repurchases in the quarter. You saw the amount that we did. We've continued to invest in the business, but we are being very judicious
about where we place our investment money. From an M&A perspective, we've had some of those throughout the year, but it really
comes down to value, like with the price that we would pay the multiple we pay on those things, and we really haven't seen a lot of
distressed assets at this point. So obviously, you see from our actions the #1 priority right now is taking care of those 2023 notes. And
then the rest of it, like you said, will just depend on our free cash flow. We like the balance of our capital allocation priorities. The
amounts will likely vary based on what we're seeing in the volume market.
 
Operator
The next question is from Matthew Bouley with Barclays.
 
Matthew Adrien Bouley
Barclays Bank PLC, Research Division - VP
The helpful commentary there on what you're seeing in the competitive environment, perhaps improving somewhat here. I'm curious if
you can elaborate on that a little bit. I think you mentioned that there is potential for eventual relief on the commission split side in that
scenario. I guess the way to ask the question would be since this competitive environment has improved in recent weeks, and that's
occurring at the same time that the market has deteriorated, just maybe if you can kind of read into the last 4, 8 weeks, what are you
seeing in terms of agent recruiting and commission splits specifically and sort of how that can kind of -- what do you think the benefit to
commission splits might look like as we go out into 2023.
 
Ryan M. Schneider
Anywhere Real Estate Inc. - CEO, President & Director
Matt, I think Charlotte covered the commission splits pretty well on the call. And as you talked about some of the benefits we're seeing. If
I can just kind of take on kind of the competitive environment side of it. Look, I think the reality is we're seeing a better competitive
environment for us because as you go into kind of a downturn, it kind of exposes different people's strengths and weaknesses, and you
see a lot of competitors kind of pulling back compared to in better markets. And you kind of see a bit of a return or flight to quality, given
our kind of financial performance and stability and our ability to even keep investing in these kinds of times.
And I think that manifested itself in what Charlotte said. The economics of recruiting have been better in the third quarter than they were
in the first or the second quarter. Our franchise sales is running ahead of last year, right, which is, last year was a really good year. We
showed you the numbers in Investor Day, and it's run ahead of it as we're getting a lot more people wanting to be part of the ecosystem
we're creating and the stability and the quality that we've got. 
Our renewals are running ahead of last year. So that's kind of the theme. I think Charlotte covered kind of how it will play out probably in
the Asian commission side, but it's a nice silver lining in an otherwise tough market. And if we can position ourselves through this to take
some share, which is a goal, and do the other things that Charlotte was talking about with our profitability and our ability to invest, you
can envision more octane out of our ecosystem coming out of a tough market. So we spent a lot of time on that, just like we spent a lot of
time on focus on the expense side and making sure we're only making the right investments, but it's been a meaningful change in the
competitive environment. I hear from my leaders in the field pretty much every week now in the last quarter.
 
Charlotte C. Simonelli
Anywhere Real Estate Inc. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
But to be clear, we definitely expect further split-increased moderation in the next quarter.
 
Matthew Adrien Bouley
Barclays Bank PLC, Research Division - VP
The second one is just on the market environment into '23 under sort of a range of scenarios, I guess. I think I'm trying to get at sort of the
offsets between what could be a further decline in the market next year, as you mentioned, the third-party sources, making that call at
this point versus the incremental cost savings. I think Charlotte at the top, you said some of the recent actions would run rate around $70
million next year. So I guess I'm just trying to balance the 2. Is there a potential -- is there a scenario where EBITDA could be flattish in
2023 if you run rating $70 million of savings with these recent additions, plus you'll have additional announcements in the next quarter.
Just kind of how do you get to any kind of comfort on where your operating EBITDA may go next year and sort of the ability to offset
further declines in market volumes?
 
Charlotte C. Simonelli
Anywhere Real Estate Inc. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
It's a great question. And I think the answer is it depends on where volumes go and how far down they would go or not because when you
think about our cost base, if you include commissions, it's like 80% variable, 20% fixed. If you exclude commissions, it's kind of the
reverse, and it does depend by the business unit. Obviously, we're highly motivated to make sure the cost base is rightsized for the
volumes that we're seeing. I tried to share the $70 million to basically explain like that's already actions as we go into the year. The
reason I'm not giving you cost savings targets for the full year is we're still working to supplement the $70 million based on how we see
volumes continuing to evolve. So I think we'll have more to share with you next quarter. But it really is highly dependent on the volumes,
and those have been super volatile. And so we just -- we're going to wait for another quarter to see how things level out.
 
Operator
The next question is from Tommy McJoynt with KBW.
 
Thomas Patrick McJoynt-Griffith
Keefe, Bruyette, & Woods, Inc., Research Division - Assistant Analyst
Just want to think back historically, when we've seen somewhat of a sharp slowdown in the housing side, and you see some competition
levels eased. Does that come from just competing brokerages facing crunches and closing up shop? Or is it just some -- perhaps the
overall agent count and the industry decreases, -- just sort of what kind of typically plays out historically when we do see a slowdown in
housing?
 
Ryan M. Schneider
Anywhere Real Estate Inc. - CEO, President & Director
Yes. Look, I'm benefiting from a lot of other people's history, but having tortured the historical data pretty well. I wouldn't spend a lot of
time on the kind of agents to leave in the industry because the ones that leave tend not to be the high producers and things like that.
What it really comes down to is the 2 combinations. One is who's still going to be in business, and you've already seen a couple of firms
by the way, in this industry shut their shops in Q3. And then who's in business but is going to be pulling back and behaving differently
than they did when kind of the market was flush and people were kind of riding the wave basically. And that latter thing is, obviously, the
bigger thing that we've been seeing in the market in the last kind of quarter or so. 
And that's why we think it's important to kind of have kind of the financial octane that we've got and to have done some of the balance
sheet work that Charlotte has done and have our company prepared because at the end of it, like I know it's a little weird to talk about
right at the moment, but we remain pretty optimistic about the long-term view of housing. I mean, we have a lot more demand than
supply for houses in this country. There's a lot of demographic trends, et cetera. Obviously, what's happened with rates and inflation and
stuff has really got us in a tough spot at the moment as an industry, but there is some good stuff here. And so Matt, excuse me, Tommy,
look, our Investor Day was like -- it feels like forever ago, but it's actually only been a few months. 
And the underlying things we talked about doing still need to happen, right? We need to focus on growing our core business. We need to
simplify that consumer experience because that's where the world is going. It's where the portals are going, where the product
companies are going. We need to take out $300 million of cost across our company over that time period to get more efficient, and we
need to gain the market share that we talked about. But the wildcard of all this, as we told you, is the housing market. But we do like the
long-term kind of demographics and demand for housing. So you're going to see us be very focused on steering through whatever this
part of the cycle is with cost discipline, prudent investment, and competitive differentiation. -- but we haven't lost sight of the fact that
we need to do those other strategic objectives for the longer term to really succeed here.
 
Thomas Patrick McJoynt-Griffith
Keefe, Bruyette, & Woods, Inc., Research Division - Assistant Analyst
And just kind of going back, I know a few questions have been asked on the kind of the expense side and the commission split side. Just
to hone in a bit more on the commission split side. So it has been trending around this, I guess, 79% to 80% level for most of the year.
And just kind of looking back a longer time period, perhaps over the past decade or so, you've seen kind of just a gradual increase in that
number. So to the extent, we do see a transaction volume decrease in 2023 and perhaps even 24%. Mechanically, can that 79% to 80%
level reset down? And does that -- is the magnitude of that maybe 1% or just kind of any way for us to help quantify how much that could
be and when that could happen?
 
Charlotte C. Simonelli
Anywhere Real Estate Inc. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
Yes. There's no like sort of magic ball for me to give you on what the actual number is going to be. We did see sequential improvement
from Q2 to Q3. And so again, it's highly dependent on the volumes and highly dependent on the agent mix, which agents are doing
which transactions. Because you can imagine, some are above that 79%, and some are below that 79%. So it's -- it will be very difficult
for me to give you an analog because it is dependent on those 2 things. But we like what we're seeing with the sequential decrease versus
Q2.
We do believe that we will continue to see improvement in Q4 from the improved -- the split increase will further moderate in Q4. So the
only thing I'll tell you, too, is any of the recruiting stuff that we've done over time, it does get amortized. So that stays in the base until it's
amortized. So there's a lot of variables here, but we're definitely encouraged by the trends we saw in the sequential moderation from Q2
to Q3, highly dependent on the volume and which agents are doing the transactions.
 
Thomas Patrick McJoynt-Griffith
Keefe, Bruyette, & Woods, Inc., Research Division - Assistant Analyst
And then just last one for me real quick. What was the investment in the RealSure JV this quarter? I think last quarter, it was a $6 million
loss.
 
Charlotte C. Simonelli
Anywhere Real Estate Inc. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
It was modest, lower than that. So low single digits.
 
Operator
The next question is from John Campbell with Stephens.
 
John Robert Campbell
Stephens Inc., Research Division - MD & Research Analyst
Ryan, I apologize. I had to hop on a little late here. But last call, you talked to the difficult market kind of forcing a division of winners and
losers. It seems to me that you may be implying that you guys might push for more profitable growth, maybe at lower margins, but I want
to check back in on that commentary and see if your views changed at all with looking at the world with maybe a little bit of a different
lens.
 
Ryan M. Schneider
Anywhere Real Estate Inc. - CEO, President & Director
Yes. I don't remember the exact comment. I'm not sure I want the headline too from that comment to have been we want lower margins
or anything like that. But continuing to push for profitable growth is, of course, important for us, and we actually demonstrate profitable
growth. So that's a good thing. Again, as I kind of was saying in Tommy's answer, strategically, we're not giving up on growing our core
business. We're gaining market share or making prudent investments even in a tough market, and we have the financial ability to do
that, and we have the quality and the stability that I think is showing up in what's happening in the market with franchise sales with
recruiting and retention. And again, some of that's because of the competitive environment has gotten better. 
But at the same time, we're being very, very focused on our margins on the cost side here in this -- as the market kind of declines here.
And to Charlotte's point, we're being pretty selective on the investment side. We've done -- we've always thought about a little more M&A
possibly in our future, but you'll look back, and you see it's not like we've done some meaningful amount here because we really only
want to do deals that we think are really good. And those haven't really been in our doorstep yet. But maybe they will be as the market
continues to put people under more stress. We'll see. 
So the bottom line is we're still probably seeing the biggest difference, John, from the last time we talked is actually seeing the
competitive differentiation play out in the quarter and actually seeing different competitive behaviors and seeing our value proposition
resonate differently out there in the market that has a little bit of a benefit on the aged commission splits and recruiting the trial has
talked about. It's got a little benefit on the franchise sales side, et cetera. And so -- but again, as I said to Tommy, we got to grow the core
business. We've got to take out $300 million of cost. We've got to improve the consumer experience, and we do need to gain market
share. Those objectives have not gone away. How we navigate them through a down part of the cycle changes around the margins a bit,
but we don't give up on it.
 
John Robert Campbell
Stephens Inc., Research Division - MD & Research Analyst
So not really relevant this last quarter. In the past, you talked to every 1 percentage point swing in volumes would equate to about $15
million of EBITDA either way. Are we back to that kind of sensitivity? Or is there a way to think about that? Is there a revised kind of
senility we should think about?
 
Charlotte C. Simonelli
Anywhere Real Estate Inc. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
It hasn't really changed. That's an annual figure, too, just so you know. So no, I don't think we have anything to update as far as the
analog on 1% of volume. I think it's still safe to use that. I think what you have to think about though, are some of the other moving pieces
with the sale of the underwriter. There's the timing on other things that impact the quarter. But on a yearly basis, that's still a very
relevant analog.
 
John Robert Campbell
Stephens Inc., Research Division - MD & Research Analyst
And then on -- I think back to Tommy's question, I think you said the $6 million of investment in Real Sure. I think in past calls, maybe
you guys kind of bracketed out or bucketed maybe $40 million all in around Rocher and some of the other strategic initiatives. Is that still
kind of a good run rate?
 
Charlotte C. Simonelli
Anywhere Real Estate Inc. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
That's what we said in the beginning of the year for that, plus some other strategic initiatives. I think what you would expect is in a
market like this, that format is probably a little less relevant. So we may have dialed back a little bit. And so that's why when he asked if it
was 6, and I said it was low single digits. Clearly, that run rate is not going to get you to something like $40 million, but tied to the
market.
 
Ryan M. Schneider
Anywhere Real Estate Inc. - CEO, President & Director
Yes, John, just to build on that, look, marketing expenses and some capital expenditures are the 2 biggest places that I would say we've
pulled back from investments given the weaker market, but there's been some others included in that kind of general $40 million bucket
Charlotte talked about. And then I was going to say exactly what she said, which is RealSure was $6 million last quarter. It was less than
that this quarter, as you talked about. And none of those signals that we don't believe in marketing, or we don't believe in capital
expenditures, or we don't believe in RealSure, it's more of just really trying to be good stewards here given how we see the market
evolving differently. And in a smaller home sale market, the ROI on these things differs. So we've tried to be good stewards and -- but
we're going to keep making prudent investments. And that's part of, I think, the competitive differentiation here that we're seeing, both
on the franchise and on the owned brokerage side.
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) The next question is from Justin Ages with Berenberg Capital Markets.
 
Justin Ian Ages
Joh. Berenberg, Gossler & Co. KG, Research Division - Analyst
First, you mentioned that luxury was still relatively strong. Can you just dig in there a little bit? Is your expectation that, that holds up
better than other facets of the market, or as affordability and low inventory continue to take their toll, it's going to start impacting that as
well?
 
Ryan M. Schneider
Anywhere Real Estate Inc. - CEO, President & Director
Yes. So Justin, let me take that from -- again, this is probably more of an anywhere real estate view than trying to speak on the whole
market. But remember, we're pretty clearly the leader in luxury with Sotheby's International Realty Quarter and Cable banker and what
some of our other brands do in luxury. And when we look at what happened in the third quarter, we talked about the 17% volume decline.
The decline in our luxury portfolios and our 750,000 are up, just to use that cut, but it's also true to $1 million enough. They just declined
less, right? But also, if you look forward and look at the listings we're taking, Justin, we had less decline in listings in that 750 and up kind
of luxury area than we did below that.
So in our portfolio, at least luxury is holding up stronger than others. And I think that probably is somewhat true for the market
personally because you have the -- you don't have as many mortgages kind of in the luxury segment sometimes. And obviously, the
mortgage rates and affordability is such a crush. The other is the place where there's the tightest inventory is the first-time homebuyer. I
mean, that is just the place I worry the most about the intersection of affordability and inventory. And so that's probably the place with
just the most pressure. So luxury is not at all immune from the negative headwinds that the whole market has seen. But at least in our
portfolio, it's been less of a drop, both looking backwards with the actual transactions we did and looking forward with the listings that
we have on our books right now.
 
Justin Ian Ages
Joh. Berenberg, Gossler & Co. KG, Research Division - Analyst
And then, I guess, continuing on that, can you or Charlotte offer any kind of further detail or parsing of the expectations for volumes to be
down 25%? How should we think about the mortgages and affordability in terms of units versus price? Are prices still expected to be up
in the fourth quarter?
 
Ryan M. Schneider
Anywhere Real Estate Inc. - CEO, President & Director
That is a great question, and I'm glad we actually had a chance to get to it here in public because it is very interesting what's happening
out there, right? And again, the 25% plus that I gave you is based off us looking at the market. But also, I'm giving you our latest data,
literally our October open contracts, our September kind of open contracts. And what we're seeing basically is pretty much all of the
decline is coming from units, right? Even in our minus 17% in Q3, it was minus 21% units, and the price was up a few percentage points.
Price is up 4 or 5 percentage points.
And if you look at the state level, you see the exact same thing, right? Both in Q3 and in October month-to-date, sides and units are down
meaningfully, price is kind of flattish basically or a little bit up effectively. And I think there's some supply and demand issues that kind of
create that, right, back to the low inventory things. But the most striking thing is how much of what's happening is the unit side. And
then even if you go to the third-party forecasters, almost all of the declines they're talking about for the future are unit based. So, Justin, I
spend all my time effectively focused on just the unit side right now because, on kind of an overall basis, that's where the real action is,
unfortunately, in terms of the slowdown in the market.
 
Operator
We have no further questions at this time, and that will conclude today's conference call and webcast. Thank you, everyone, for
participating. You may now disconnect.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
©2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.