CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
DJ Busch
InvenTrust Properties Corp. - President & CEO
 
Mike Phillips
InvenTrust Properties Corp. - EVP, CFO, & Treasurer
 
Christy David
InvenTrust Properties Corp. - EVP, COO, General Counsel, & Secretary
 
Dan Lombardo
InvenTrust Properties Corp. - VP, Investor Relations
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
Floris van Dijkum
Compass Point Research and Trading, LLC - Analyst
 
Craig Schmidt
Bank of America Corporation - Analyst
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Thank you for standing by, and welcome to InvenTrust's third-quarter 2022 earnings conference call. My name is [Forum], and I'll be your
conference call operator today. Before we begin, I would like to remind our listeners that today's presentation is being recorded, and a
replay will be available on the Investors section of the company's website at inventrustproperties.com.
(Operator Instructions) I would now like to turn the call over to Mr. Dan Lombardo, Vice President of Investor Relations. Please go ahead,
sir.
 
Dan Lombardo
InvenTrust Properties Corp. - VP, Investor Relations
Good morning, everyone, and thank you for joining us. In the room with me today is DJ Busch, President and Chief Executive Officer; Mike
Phillips, Chief Financial Officer; Christy David, Chief Operating Officer; and Dave Heimberger, Chief Investment Officer. Following the
team's prepared remarks, we will open the lines and answer questions from the research analyst community.
As a reminder, some of today's comments may contain forward-looking statements about the company's views on the future of our
business and financial performance, including forward-looking earnings guidance and future market conditions. These are based on
management's current beliefs and expectations and are subject to various risks and uncertainties.
Any forward-looking statements speak only as of today's date, and we assume no obligation to update any forward-looking statements
made on today's call or that are in the quarterly financial supplemental or press release.
In addition, we will also reference certain non-GAAP financial measures. The comparable GAAP financial measures are included in this
quarter's earnings materials, which are posted on our Investor Relations website.
With that, it is my pleasure to turn the call over to DJ.
 
DJ Busch
InvenTrust Properties Corp. - President & CEO
Thanks, Dan, and good morning, everyone. A little over a year ago, InvenTrust listed on the NYSE. And at that time, we laid out a
business plan and strategy that offered a unique investment opportunity in the retail REIT sector.
We've continued to execute on our stated goals throughout the last 12 months, one of which is moving our portfolio concentration closer
to 100% Sun Belt by sourcing attractive grocery-anchored acquisitions in our target markets while opportunistically rotating out of our
non-Sun Belt assets.
We also utilized our investment grade rating to diversify and fortify our capital structure. Our team's efforts across all facets of the
business proved that a simple and focused strategy can deliver strong results as shown by our solid double-digit core FFO growth in
2022 as implied in our updated guidance.
What this past year also underscored is that the underlying quality of our portfolio is outstanding. Our Sun Belt markets continue to
experience in migration of companies and highly skilled workers, further adding to the positive demographic trends seen over the past
decade.
Further, the demographic profiles of our consumers in our markets likely are able to better absorb some of the pressures from inflation
and economic uncertainty. While we know we're not immune to the adverse impacts of inflation, rising interest rates, and recessionary
risks, InvenTrust has and is expected to continue delivering consistent results.
Leasing demand remains robust, resulting in record-high leased occupancy and strong same-property NOI growth for the first nine
months of the year. On the supply side, higher costs and inflation headwinds are limiting new development of grocery-anchored centers
as the hurdles for new construction remain challenging.
This scenario brings additional demand and leasing opportunities to our portfolio and affords us the opportunity to evaluate and focus
on ensuring the proper tenant mix and credit quality at our centers, all while driving rents.
When you include our sector-leading balance sheet, we have positioned the company not only to drive growth when times are good but
also preserve cash flow while looking for opportunities during times of economic uncertainty. The strength of our balance sheet and our
low leverage uniquely positions us to take advantage of any value dislocation we may see in the market.
That said, on the transaction front, we remain extremely disciplined in our evaluation of new acquisitions. With that, I'm going to turn the
call over to Mike to discuss our financial results and guidance in more detail.
 
Mike Phillips
InvenTrust Properties Corp. - EVP, CFO, & Treasurer
Thanks, DJ, and thank you, everyone, for joining us. Yesterday, InvenTrust reported core FFO of $82.9 million or $1.23 per share,
representing an increase of 21% for the first nine months of 2022 compared to the same period last year. The increase was largely driven
by pro rata same-property NOI contributing $0.08 per share, an additional $0.03 from 2022 acquisitions.
In addition, we realized G&A savings of $0.09 due to recurring and non-recurring cost reduction as well as a positive $0.07 impact from
our $100-million share repurchase in Q4 of last year. These gains were offset by an increase in interest expense of $0.07.
Pro rata same-property NOI year to date reached $110.5 million, growing 5.4% over the same period last year. The increase was primarily
driven by contractual rent increases, occupancy gains, reductions of abatements given in 2022, offset by net out-of-period rent collected.
I did want to point out, as expected and discussed in our previous two earnings calls, our year-to-date results did decelerate in
comparison to the strong start for the first half of the year. This is primarily due to significant out-of-period rent collected in the third
quarter of 2021 as well as the timing of operating expenses that have been contemplated in our guidance throughout the year.
Removing this out-of-period rent from the comparison periods, pro rata same-property NOI would have increased 0.8% for the quarter
and 6.6% year to date.
Moving to the balance sheet, as of September 30, our net leverage ratio was 25% and net debt to adjusted EBITDA was 5 times, which
makes our leverage profile one of the lowest in the sector. Our pro rata weighted average interest rate is 3.8%, and our weighted average
maturity is 4.9 years. Approximately 87% of our debt is fixed rate.
At the end of the third quarter, we had approximately $575 million of total liquidity, including $350 million of borrowing capacity
available on our credit facility. With our cash on hand, cash flow generated by our portfolio, and the significant capacity available on our
revolver, we can address our near-term maturities as well as continue to evaluate strategic opportunities and our capital allocation plan
without needing to source new debt.
Moving on to our guidance, we are raising our core FFO range to $1.57 to $1.60. Reduced G&A and an increase in interest income are the
main drivers of the upward revision. We are maintaining our pro rata same-property NOI growth guidance at 4% to 5%. Our full guidance
assumptions are provided in our supplemental disclosure filed yesterday.
With that, I'm going to turn the call to Christy to discuss our portfolio activity.
 
Christy David
InvenTrust Properties Corp. - EVP, COO, General Counsel, & Secretary
Good morning, everyone. As Mike and DJ mentioned, InvenTrust continues to experience strong operational and leasing performance.
For the quarter, we signed 83 leases, representing 478,000 square feet from various retail categories. Our leased occupancy ended the
first nine months of the year at 95.6%, 210 basis points above the same time period last year.
Our anchor lease percentage for the third quarter remained at 98.2%, and our small shop increased to 91%, both at all-time highs. This
solid leasing volume was bolstered by lease spreads of 8% for comparable new and renewal leases for the quarter. These results
continue to validate the strength of our markets, our irreplaceable location, and showcases our portfolio's ability to attract and retain
tenants.
Our annual base rent as of September 30 for the pro rata same-property portfolio was $18.91, an increase of 2.5% compared to
September 30 of 2021. Anchor tenant ABR was $12.39 with small-shop ABR hitting $31.91, both increases over Q2 of 2022 and Q3 of
2021. Our retention rate through the year is above 89%. We expect lease renewals to continue to make up a significant percentage of our
leasing deals.
In an environment of rising build-out costs, a robust retention rate that eliminates downtime will remain a focal point in our overall
leasing strategy. In our discussions with retailers, there is a common theme: to make long-term real estate decisions to secure the
best-brick-and-mortar locations with landlords that are committed to meeting store opening expectations.
Our team continues to be proficient in effectively turning signed leases into rent-paying tenants. In a period where supply chain issues
remain prevalent, we are thrilled with our team's ability to deliver spaces on time. For the third quarter and year to date, InvenTrust
opened up 120,000 and 225,000 square feet of space, respectively.
Finally, I wanted to address the impact of Hurricane Ian as it relates to our portfolio. InvenTrust owns 11 properties in Florida and seven in
North Carolina, all near the path of the storm. I applaud the hard work and dedication of the InvenTrust team who helped prepare
properties and tenants for this historic weather event. Their efforts were crucial in limiting the damage to our centers.
After evaluating the centers immediately after the storm, some properties did sustain some wind and water damage. However, we are
pleased to report that cleanup has been swift, and our tenants are back open, operating and servicing their communities. The recovery
for impacted areas remains an ongoing process, and we continue to work closely with our tenants to provide the support and assistance
needed.
Our thoughts continue to be with our partners and their families that were impacted by the hurricane. Now, I will turn the call over to DJ
for some final remarks.
 
DJ Busch
InvenTrust Properties Corp. - President & CEO
Thanks, Christy. I would like to conclude by officially welcoming Smita Shah to InvenTrust's Board of Directors. Last month, InvenTrust
announced the expansion of our Board and the appointment of Smita. I know she will be a dynamic add to our Board and will bring a
new perspective as well as an impressive array of leadership and understanding of complex global infrastructure and environmental
solutions.
Smita's appointment furthers InvenTrust's commitment to finding high-caliber professionals across all levels of the company while
enhancing our governance and management oversight efforts. We look forward to working with her and the rest of the Board in our goal
to maximize shareholder value.
Operator, this concludes our prepared remarks. Please open the line for any questions.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) Floris van Dijkum with Compass Point.
 
Floris van Dijkum
Compass Point Research and Trading, LLC - Analyst
Thanks for taking my question, guys. DJ, I'd love to get your -- I mean, the real estate industry and the retail industry, in particular, were
being impacted by two trends. Retail, in particular, one positive and maybe one slight negative.
The positive is that most of your peers have been talking about continued leasing demand from retailers, and I wanted to get your
perspective on that, what you're seeing and what you expect to see going forward.
And then the negative trend is, obviously, rising interest rates are going to put upward pressure on cap rates, and maybe if you can
provide a little commentary on that as well?
 
DJ Busch
InvenTrust Properties Corp. - President & CEO
Yeah. Hey, good morning, Floris. Thanks for the question. So to address the positive first, you hit the nail on the head. The underlying
fundamentals of the business are quite strong as many of our peers have alluded to or mentioned in their in their calls as well. We're
seeing much of the same.
Obviously, the markets that we're in have continued to experience tremendous in-migration, positive demographic trends, all in the face
of higher inflation, higher housing costs, and the like. But what we're seeing on the ground is [continued leasing demand].
One thing that I would mention is, obviously, there's a -- the big piece that's really in our favor is the lack of supply, lack of institutional
supply, with occupancy levels across the board at all-time highs. That gives us a lot more levers than we've had in the past.
You add to that the construction costs being elevated. The mobility of the tenants is probably not as easy as it used to be. So those two
dynamics, I think, are working in our favor. How much of -- how long and how sustainable that is remains to be seen. But for the
foreseeable future, we see pretty good traction as it relates to our leasing demand.
On the capital market side, look, I think we're all dealing with the same thing. Luckily, we did a lot of our financing right before we listed
the company, and then thereafter with the private placement earlier this year where, in hindsight, the rates were quite favorable based
on where pricing is today.
As it relates to cap rates, I think the thing that we're watching is -- cap rate is just 1 data point. We're trying to get to a return where we
can make it accretive to our business.
And because we haven't seen cap rates move as much as we've seen financing costs, that's a little bit more difficult in today's
environment. Now if cap rates increase and unlevered returns increase where we can make money, that's okay, too. So I think, as I
mentioned the prepared remarks, we're taking a little bit of a wait-and-see approach to see if cap rates rise or some opportunities that
we can take advantage of.
 
Floris van Dijkum
Compass Point Research and Trading, LLC - Analyst
In terms of cap rates, I know you just bought a smaller center in North Carolina, I believe, just outside of Charlotte. How long have you
been looking at that? And has the cap rate on that center moved in your favor, or was this a historical deal that was done at rates that
you think are maybe not reflective of where they are going to?
 
DJ Busch
InvenTrust Properties Corp. - President & CEO
No, it's a fair question. And obviously, it just closed subsequent to the quarter. So obviously, that's been in negotiation for a while. It was
unencumbered, so those deals tend to move a little bit more quickly. We were very happy with the yield that we were getting. It's
accretive to the business. It's accretive to the cash flow in the portfolio, which is why it made us comfortable.
Also, remember that we've been recycling out of Colorado. So really, it's almost like a match funding, taking out some of our Colorado
assets and moving even deeper into the Sun Belt, particularly North Carolina, on an accretive basis.
 
Floris van Dijkum
Compass Point Research and Trading, LLC - Analyst
Thanks, DJ. That's it for me.
 
Operator
Craig Schmidt, Bank of America.
 
Craig Schmidt
Bank of America Corporation - Analyst
Thank you. I just wanted to focus on the property operating expense. It continues to increase, and maybe you can tell us what's driving
that? And is the third quarter a good run rate?
 
DJ Busch
InvenTrust Properties Corp. - President & CEO
Hey, good morning, Craig. Thanks for the question. The third quarter wouldn't be a good run rate. I think we've alluded to in the first and
second quarter this year that many of our property operating expenses, particularly on the non-recoverable side, we're going to be a little
bit backloaded.
The run rate, I would say, was probably closer to what you saw at the beginning or the first half of the year as opposed to what you're
going to see in the third and fourth quarter, where we expected some one-time items, some opportunities to get some things done at the
property levels to further increase the demand at our centers. But I would look at the first half as opposed to the second half, and that
goes for the fourth quarter as well.
 
Craig Schmidt
Bank of America Corporation - Analyst
Okay, great. And how much higher can you take your anchor occupancy and your small-shop occupancy? I'm just wondering where the
bigger opportunity lies.
 
DJ Busch
InvenTrust Properties Corp. - President & CEO
Yes. I mean, look, we're at all-time highs now. I think we can continue to push. The big bogey is we haven't seen any bankruptcies in a
while, right? So I think, withstanding no bankruptcies with some of the obvious tenants that have struggled where us and many of our
peers have at least some exposure, everything else feels quite good.
I would say, on the small-shop side, we're just being mindful of the inflationary pressures on the small-shop tenants. I think it hits them a
little particularly harder than it does, maybe for some of the larger national anchors. But we expect occupancy, based on our leased
occupancy versus physical, to continue to increase barring any major disruptions on the bankruptcy front.
The good news, though, Craig, is once we get to these levels of occupancy, that's where we can start to really push price. And as Christy
mentioned, with a retention rate in the high 80s and where you can push price, there's no better return than hitting renewals where
you're not putting a whole lot of capital, if any, back into the centers, but you're increasing your rents.
 
Craig Schmidt
Bank of America Corporation - Analyst
Thank you. And then, just finally, maybe talk a little bit about the consumer. Are you still seeing a good traffic to your centers through
October? And when you talk to your retailers, what are their expectations for holiday '22?
 
DJ Busch
InvenTrust Properties Corp. - President & CEO
Yeah, I think holiday 2022 is -- excuse me -- is still a little bit unknown. I will tell you that the consumer, at least at our centers, still is
quite strong. Our traffic is down modestly from earlier in the year but still above pre-pandemic levels, which is great. I think, obviously,
the grocers in an inflationary environment continue to do quite well. Even if trips are down, baskets make up for that.
What we're focused on is making sure the small shops, the ancillary offerings in our centers, whether it be services or for smaller food
options -- that's where our focus has been, and we haven't seen any material changes yet, which is good.
Not to say it won't happen if this is more sustainable or longer lasting than we anticipate, but going into this holiday season, I would say
that we feel cautious but relatively optimistic that our centers are going to do well.
 
Craig Schmidt
Bank of America Corporation - Analyst
Okay. Thank you. That's it for me.
 
DJ Busch
InvenTrust Properties Corp. - President & CEO
Thanks, Craig.
 
Operator
Thank you for your question. This concludes our question-and-answer session for today's call. I will pass back to DJ Busch now for closing
remarks. Thank you.
 
DJ Busch
InvenTrust Properties Corp. - President & CEO
Thank you, everyone, for joining us this morning. If you have any follow-ups, please don't hesitate to reach out. Enjoy the rest of your day.
 
Operator
This concludes today's conference call. Thank you for your participation. You may now disconnect.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
©2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.