CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
Jennifer F. Francis
Diversified Healthcare Trust - President, CEO & Managing Trustee
 
Michael B. Kodesch
Diversified Healthcare Trust - Director of IR
 
Richard W. Siedel
Diversified Healthcare Trust - CFO & Treasurer
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
Bryan Anthony Maher
B. Riley Securities, Inc., Research Division - MD
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Good morning, and welcome to the Diversified Healthcare Trust Third Quarter 2022 Conference Call. (Operator Instructions). Please note
this event is being recorded. I would now like to turn the conference over to Michael Kodesch, Director of Investor Relations. Please go
ahead.
 
Michael B. Kodesch
Diversified Healthcare Trust - Director of IR
Good morning, and welcome to Diversified Healthcare Trust call covering the third quarter 2022 results. Joining me on today's call are
Jennifer Francis, President and Chief Executive Officer; and Rick Siedel, Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer. Today's call includes
presentation by management, followed by a question-and-answer session. I would like to note that the transcription, recording and
retransmission of today's conference call are strictly prohibited without the prior written consent of Diversified Healthcare Trust or DHC.
Today's conference call contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995
and other securities laws. These forward-looking statements are based upon DHC's present beliefs and expectations as of today,
Thursday, November 3, 2022. The company undertakes no obligation to revise or publicly release the results of any revision to the
forward-looking statements made in today's conference call other than through filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, or
SEC. In addition, this call may contain non-GAAP numbers, including normalized funds from operations or normalized FFO, EBITDA, net
operating income or NOI and cash basis net operating income or cash basis NOI.
A Reconciliations of net income or loss attributable to common shareholders through these non-GAAP figures and the components to
calculate AFFO, CAD or FAD are available in our supplemental operating and financial data package found on our website at
www.dhcreit.com. Actual results may differ materially from those projected in any forward-looking statements. Additional information
concerning factors that could cause those differences is contained in our filings with the SEC. Investors are cautioned not to place undue
reliance upon any forward-looking statements. Now I'd like to turn the call over to Jennifer.
 
Jennifer F. Francis
Diversified Healthcare Trust - President, CEO & Managing Trustee
Thank you, Michael, and good morning. Thank you for joining us on today's third quarter conference call. I'd like to begin the call by
reviewing this quarter's highlights. Same-property cash basis NOI in our office portfolio segment increased 4.7% year-over-year and 1.2%
compared to the second quarter, while it was a challenging quarter in terms of shop segment expenses on which we'll provide more
detail shortly. Our operators drove a meaningful improvement in shop occupancy compared to the second quarter, with an increase of
110 basis points for the total portfolio, representing our sixth consecutive quarter of occupancy growth.
And we ended the quarter with over $800 million of cash and limited near-term debt maturities, providing us the liquidity necessary to
continue with our plan to invest in our shop segment communities to drive this portfolio towards stabilization. Starting with our Office
Portfolio segment, the 4.7% year-over-year same-property cash basis NOI growth is indicative of the strength and quality of our medical
office and life science assets and the leasing results we continue to achieve. Leasing velocity in the third quarter remained generally in
line with our 3-year quarterly average as we executed over 220,000 square feet of new and renewal leases with average roll-up in rents
of 2.4% and a weighted average lease term of 5.8 years.
Today, our weighted average lease term for the entire office portfolio segment is approximately 5.8 years. Only one tenant represents
more than 3% of annualized revenue in this segment. Advocate, Aurora Healthcare represents approximately 7.7% of the Office Portfolio
segment's annualized revenue and has a remaining lease term of over 9 years. From an operating expense perspective, over 90% of our
portfolio of Medical office and Life Science assets have expense recovery structures in place where the tenants are responsible for
increases in expenses either fully or over a base year, largely sheltering this segment's results from the current inflationary environment.
We believe our combination of strong assets with high utilization rates, favorable lease structures and tenant diversification is critically
important in the current macroeconomic environment. While same-property occupancy decreased slightly during the third quarter to
90.2%, there was no significant vacancies driving this result. Our leasing pipeline now contains over 1.2 million square feet of potential
leasing, over 40% more than our Q2 pipeline, potential transactions with new or expanding tenants account for 67% of this pipeline. The
majority of which we expect would result in roll-ups to prior rents should we get these deals over the finish line.
We're making progress on our redevelopment projects in our office portfolio segment, and we'll continue to evaluate opportunities across
our portfolio, where redevelopment will generate a significant uplift in asset value while providing strong returns. Turning to senior
living. Nationally, senior living is recovering from the devastating effects of the pandemic on our industry, as occupancy continues to
improve. Fundamentally, supply and demand trends are supporting this recovery. The number of senior living units under construction is
at its lowest level since 2015, with inventory growth moderating to just 1.4% year-over-year. From a demand perspective, we expect the
environment to continue to grow more favorable. Based on available census data, the 80-plus demographic is projected to increase an
average of 3.7% per year over the next 2 years compared to the 2% compounded annual growth rate over the last 5 years. This
accelerated growth in the target demographic should continue to provide recovery tailwinds while new supply remains modest.
Within our portfolio, we've benefited from this recovery as occupancy increased at its fastest pace in over a decade. Starting with our
same-property portfolio, average occupancy increased 120 basis points from the second quarter to 75.3%. We've seen steady
improvement following the changes made at AlerisLife, which include considerable investment within their sales and marketing
functions and the implementation of a community incentive program that rewards teams for occupancy growth and expense
containment. For the 170 community not 107 community non-same-property portfolio, average occupancy increased approximately 80
basis points from the second quarter, and this portfolio is now up 660 basis points from the prior year.
While the operators of our SHOP segment were able to grow average occupancy by 110 basis points from the last quarter, while also
growing revenue 9.7% year-over-year. These strong gains were negated this quarter by elevated costs. First, third quarter SHOP results
were adversely impacted by Hurricane Ian. While the majority of our communities in the Southeast region were largely unaffected by the
hurricane, we had one 380-unit community in Fort Myers, Florida that sustained significant damage. This community is out of service
while building repairs are underway, and we expect to reopen the community in phases starting at the end of this month. More than half
of the residents previously living in this community temporarily moved to nearby DHC owned communities, and we expect demand to be
sizable for the community once repairs are complete.
Expenses during the third quarter were also elevated due to inflationary pressures primarily affecting food costs, utilities and labor.
Access to labor and wage inflation have been and will continue to be the biggest challenges facing the senior living industry. We saw
increases in agency staffing expense this quarter as our operators work to meet the increased care demand that came with the portfolio's
occupancy growth. Overall, our operators continue to push to stabilize their workforces by improving their recruiting and retention
strategies. As a result, we've seen decreases in turnover, the average time to fill positions and the number of open positions across our
portfolio compared to the second quarter.
As we continue to grow occupancy, we expect to hit certain occupancy thresholds where our operators will see improved labor
efficiencies in their staffing levels. Even with those efficiencies, we expect increases in wages and benefits to continue to challenge our
ability to return margins to pre-pandemic levels. I'll now turn the call over to Rick to provide details on our financial results.
 
Richard W. Siedel
Diversified Healthcare Trust - CFO & Treasurer
Thanks, Jennifer, and good morning, everyone. For the third quarter, we reported normalized FFO of negative $0.06 per share. Adjusted
EBITDA in the third quarter was $35.8 million. Our consolidated cash basis NOI decreased approximately $13.2 million from the second
quarter with $12.2 million of that decrease coming from the SHOP segment, which included a $7.5 million decrease in the same-property
SHOP communities and a $4.7 million decrease in our non-same-property portfolio.
The decrease in our same-property portfolio was attributable to a variety of factors that I would classify broadly into 3 categories. The
first is the increased expenses related to inflationary pressures and included higher rates for things like labor, utilities and food. These
expenses accounted for $5 million of the NOI decrease and should be recaptured through higher rates charged to residents in the future.
The second category of expenses, approximately $5.2 million is the result of the current lease-up strategy and includes costs for
marketing, training, sales incentives and apartment turns. The final category that impacted our same-property SHOP communities was
the $3.8 million of costs related to Hurricane Ian. These 3 categories of expense increases were partially offset by same-property revenue
increasing $6.5 million as a result of higher occupancy and rate. Our non-same-property SHOP NOI decrease was largely attributable to
just 5 communities with a high percentage of skilled nursing units.
Consistent with industry trends for the skilled space, these communities recognize substantially higher costs during the quarter,
primarily related to agency staffing. Our operators are very focused on this and have plans in place to reduce the use of agency labor in
our community. Interest expense of $46.9 million represented a decrease of approximately $9 million from the second quarter following
the $500 million redemption of 9 3/4% senior notes in June. This redemption reduces our annual interest expense by approximately $49
million.
In July, we prepaid a mortgage note due to mature in October on 2 senior living communities for approximately $15 million. At quarter
end, we had total outstanding debt of $3.1 billion and net debt of $2.3 billion was equal to just 29% of gross assets. Aside from the $114
million partial repayment of the revolver scheduled for January of 2023, we have no significant maturities until 2024, and we have
almost $5.8 billion of unencumbered gross real estate assets. At quarter end, we had over $800 million of cash and restricted cash on
hand, which we plan to use for capital investments and debt repayment. In the third quarter, we spent $70 million on capital
expenditures across our portfolio, which included approximately $52.9 million of capital improvements within the SHOP segment and
$16.9 million of capital was deployed in the office portfolio.
During the first 3 quarters, we spent approximately $195 million on capital improvements across the portfolio. Based on projects
previously underway and starting in the fourth quarter, we anticipate spending approximately $115 million for the remainder of the year.
As we've discussed previously, investing in our portfolio is a priority for us, and we continue to develop plans to improve our properties in
order to grow occupancy, push rental rates and enhance the overall value of our portfolio. That concludes our prepared remarks.
Operator, please open up the line for questions.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Operator
We will now begin the question-and-answer session. (Operator Instructions) Our first question is from Bryan Maher with B. Riley
Securities.
 
Bryan Anthony Maher
B. Riley Securities, Inc., Research Division - MD
A few from me. On the hurricane Ian, can you drill down a little bit more on the actual damage to the property, and I think you said you're
going to start reopening in phases later this month. But how long will it take to fully reopen the property?
 
Richard W. Siedel
Diversified Healthcare Trust - CFO & Treasurer
Bryan, thanks for the question. The damage was fairly extensive. I mean there was a sizable surge. And as a result, our first floor was
flooded. It's also the IL portion of that building has a tower that sustained some damage. We had some rooftop units that are not on top
of the roof anymore. So there's a sizable amount of work to do. We think the AL building can be reopened by the end of the month, and
we're tracking that way. The IL building will take us a little bit more time. Probably best guess is probably middle of 2023.
But the positive in this is there's probably an opportunity to move it up market a little bit. It's a good building and a good market, but
we're going to be smart about the capital that gets put back into the building as we restore it.
 
Bryan Anthony Maher
B. Riley Securities, Inc., Research Division - MD
And I'm sure that there were no injuries or issues in that regard, like you were able to move people out well in advance of the hurricane
hitting.
 
Richard W. Siedel
Diversified Healthcare Trust - CFO & Treasurer
Yes, absolutely. The team is expert at evacuating when they need to. So everyone was safe and sound, it's really just loss of some
property, and it will get restored. It's nothing that can't be restored. It's pretty amazing to see how the team rallies to make sure the
residents are well cared for in these situations.
 
Bryan Anthony Maher
B. Riley Securities, Inc., Research Division - MD
Got it. And as it relates to insurance proceeds or deductibles, can you give us a little color on what you're seeing? I know it's still early
innings.
 
Richard W. Siedel
Diversified Healthcare Trust - CFO & Treasurer
Yes. So the deductible is largely accounted for already. So I think a lot of the future spend will be the capital that we use to restore the
building. So it probably won't have much of a P&L impact on a go-forward basis.
 
Jennifer F. Francis
Diversified Healthcare Trust - President, CEO & Managing Trustee
They are still working through exactly what needs to be done there. So that we still don't have a complete idea of the costs associated
with getting the building back online.
 
Bryan Anthony Maher
B. Riley Securities, Inc., Research Division - MD
Got it. So maybe shifting gears to SHOP expenses. And I think that you -- I couldn't write fast enough, talked about the skilled nursing
facility being the lion's share of that. But what type of plans internally are you developing to get this under control such that this -- we're
not talking about this 2 or 4 quarters from now. I mean how dire is it, how addressable is it and maybe steps you're taking at the present?
 
Jennifer F. Francis
Diversified Healthcare Trust - President, CEO & Managing Trustee
Well, I think as Rick said, Bryan, there were 3 categories of expenses that were pretty high this quarter. For skilled nursing, the challenge,
of course, is as big -- skilled nursing and assisted living and I think it's been clear that the industry is recovering, the need-based is
recovering more quickly than choice-based senior living. As they grow occupancy, they need to bring on folks to care for the residents.
And so while we are pushing our operators to grow occupancy, if they can't bring staffing on quickly enough to care for those folks, they
need to bring agency on.
The -- on the skilled nursing operators, they're very focused on bringing regular employees in so they don't have to tap into agency, but
it's going to be a continuing challenge. I think they're doing a good job this quarter. They were hit particularly hard with the agency, but
we're hoping with everything they're doing to attract employees that this will subside in quarters to come.
 
Bryan Anthony Maher
B. Riley Securities, Inc., Research Division - MD
Got it. Maybe shifting gears a little bit to how you're balancing your spending, which is significant on CapEx. I know you have over $800
million in cash, but when you look from the outside and then you see sizable CapEx spending, the purchase of the Fremont property near
San Francisco in August, I believe it was versus liquidity needs and maturities debt down the road, you're not spending like your stressed
REIT and yet your shares are trading that way. What comfort would you give to investors who maybe are a little perplexed by what they're
seeing?
 
Jennifer F. Francis
Diversified Healthcare Trust - President, CEO & Managing Trustee
Yes. We're extremely focused on growing EBITDA. And as we've said a number of times, and we've talked about it before, Bryan, that
getting EBITDA to grow -- this company really has an EBITDA issue. And so our plan to grow EBITDA is to invest capital. Capital is not
the golden ticket. So it can't be just capital. The operators need to do everything they can to turn their operations around. And we think
they all have very good plans in place to do that. But without the investments in the communities, they will have a hard time recovering.
So this month was an anomaly in expenses. We expect that we'll continue to be able to push occupancy, but we have to invest in the
communities in order to do that.
 
Bryan Anthony Maher
B. Riley Securities, Inc., Research Division - MD
A question we get a lot is, are the SHOP communities damaged during -- or in bad locations or there's an issue with them relative to new
supply. Can you talk a little bit about the facilities you've owned, you've owned them for a while in general, have the communities around
them grown positively? And for those that maybe haven't the market's grown away from that particular facility, are those the ones that
you sold over the last couple of years? If you can kind of help us think through that, that would be great.
 
Jennifer F. Francis
Diversified Healthcare Trust - President, CEO & Managing Trustee
Yes. That's a good question, Bryan, and you hit on it toward the end of your question. We really did call this portfolio of communities that
we did not think would be successful moving forward. And so the portfolio that we're left with is a good portfolio. We started 2020 with a
plan to spend a lot of money in capital in '20 and '21, and the pandemic delayed that. So we -- I think we started a little bit behind the
eight ball in that we were delayed in the deployment of capital. I think this portfolio's occupancy would be higher now if we had been
able to just deploy that capital in '20 and '21 as planned.
So now we're deploying it just delayed by a couple of years. We feel very good about the ability for this portfolio to recover.
 
Bryan Anthony Maher
B. Riley Securities, Inc., Research Division - MD
Okay. And then just maybe two more quick ones from me, maybe for Rick. The covenant issue in the incurrence test, I know you guys
don't have a crystal ball on how quickly SHOP occupancy recovers and expenses decline and EBITDA grows. But what's kind of your best
guess that you hit the threshold such that you can be back in the market refinancing debt?
 
Richard W. Siedel
Diversified Healthcare Trust - CFO & Treasurer
It's a good question, Bryan. And I agree. I mean it's really been hard to forecast when the SHOP portfolio will really turn around. We are
really pleased with some of the progress we've seen. We are making progress on occupancy, for example. We would like to see a little bit
more of a shift. This quarter, we added a lot of residents on the assisted living memory care side and not as many on the independent
living side, which is typically higher margin. So there's definitely still some work to do. We need to move occupancies up. We do think
some of the inflationary costs will persist. We're going to have to push higher rates to offset that.
The timing of all that is still up in the air. We've had some of the new operators transition to January 1 increases versus anniversary dates.
So we do think there's some tailwinds come Q1 because we will be pushing rates probably in that 10%-ish range, possibly higher if
inflation continues. So budgets are being worked through right now.
Overall, I'd say all of the operators across the board really believe there's a lot of opportunity. So it's hard to tell you when that incurrence
test will turn around exactly because there's a couple of moving pieces. There's -- you got to remember that it's done on a pro forma
basis, and we don't have a particular refinancing deal in front of us right now in order to do the math. But if we focus on increasing the
EBITDA, it will happen sooner rather than later.
 
Bryan Anthony Maher
B. Riley Securities, Inc., Research Division - MD
Great. Just one last quick one. On the cash, the $800 million in cash, I know that a lot of it is kind of earmarked over the next year and
some is being held as cushion, but I'm assuming that you guys are starting to collect some pretty sizable interest income off that with
money markets now kind of in the 2.5% to 3.5% range. Shouldn't we start to see that on the income statement and that partially starts to
buffer your otherwise not insignificant interest expense?
 
Richard W. Siedel
Diversified Healthcare Trust - CFO & Treasurer
Yes, absolutely. And you see this quarter, we had a little -- it's about $4.1 million of interest and other income on the P&L. So yes, you're
right. I mean that is pretty substantial. It will likely increase as rates keep going up, but it is offset by the amounts outstanding on the
revolver. So I wouldn't -- again, we -- the balance sheet is what it is, and we're moving forward, and we've got $5.8 billion of
unencumbered gross assets that are available. So we still think we've got the flexibility we need. We are entirely focused on growing
EBITDA right now to get it back to where it needs to be.
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions) This concludes our question-and-answer session. I would like to turn the conference back over to Jennifer Francis
for any closing remarks.
 
Jennifer F. Francis
Diversified Healthcare Trust - President, CEO & Managing Trustee
Thank you, operator. We're working hard to maximize the value of our assets through capital investment, redevelopment and continued
execution with leasing and occupancy growth. With a sizable amount of cash and few debt maturities until 2024, we believe we have
both the time and flexibility to capitalize on favorable health care industry fundamentals and to continue investing in the recovery of our
SHOP segment. Finally, we look forward to seeing many of you at Navy in San Francisco this month. Operator, that concludes our call.
 
Operator
The conference has now concluded. Thank you for attending today's presentation. You may now disconnect.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
©2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.