CORPORATE PARTICIPANTS
 
Ian C. Weissman
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - SVP of Corporate Strategy
 
Sean M. Dell'Orto
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
 
Thomas Jeremiah Baltimore
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
CONFERENCE CALL PARTICIPANTS
 
Anthony Franklin Powell
Barclays Bank PLC, Research Division - Research Analyst
 
Charles Patrick Scholes
Truist Securities, Inc., Research Division - MD of Lodging, Gaming and Leisure Equity Research & Analyst
 
Chris Darling
Green Street Advisors, LLC, Research Division - Analyst of Lodging
 
Chris Jon Woronka
Deutsche Bank AG, Research Division - Research Analyst
 
Dany Asad
BofA Securities, Research Division - VP & Research Analyst
 
Dori Lynn Kesten
Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, Research Division - Senior Analyst
 
Duane Thomas Pfennigwerth
Evercore ISI Institutional Equities, Research Division - Senior MD
 
Jay Bradley Kornreich
SMBC Nikko Securities America, Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
 
Neil Lawrence Malkin
Capital One Securities, Inc., Research Division - Analyst
 
Robin Margaret Farley
UBS Investment Bank, Research Division - MD and Research Analyst
 
Smedes Rose
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - Director & Senior Analyst
 
William Andrew Crow
Raymond James & Associates, Inc., Research Division - Analyst
PRESENTATION
 
Operator
Ladies and gentlemen, greetings, and welcome to the Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. Third Quarter 2022 Earnings Conference Call. (Operator
Instructions)
As a reminder, this conference is being recorded. It is now my pleasure to introduce your host, Ian Weissman, Senior VP, Corporate
Strategy. Please go ahead, sir.
 
Ian C. Weissman
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - SVP of Corporate Strategy
Thank you, operator, and welcome, everyone, to the Park Hotels & Resorts Third Quarter 2022 Earnings Call. Before we begin, I would
like to remind everyone that many of the comments made today are considered forward-looking statements under federal security laws.
As described in our filings with the SEC, these statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties that could cause future results
to differ from those expressed, and we are not obligated to publicly update or revise these forward-looking statements. Actual future
performance, outcomes and results may differ materially from those expressed in forward-looking statements.
Note also that all comparisons to prior year periods are on a pro forma basis. Please refer to the documents filed by Park with the SEC,
specifically the most recent reports on Form 10-K and 10-Q, which identify important risk factors that could cause actual results to differ
from those contained in forward-looking statements.
In addition, on today's call, we will discuss certain non-GAAP financial information, such as FFO and adjusted EBITDA. You can find this
information together with reconciliations to the most recent -- to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure in yesterday's
earnings release as well as in our 8-K filed with the SEC and the supplemental financial information available on our website at
pkhotelsandresorts.com.
This morning, Tom Baltimore, our Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, will provide a review of Park's third quarter performance and
outline of Park's strategic priorities and the outlook for the balance of this year. Sean Dell'Orto, our Chief Financial Officer, will provide
additional color on third quarter results, an update on our balance sheet and liquidity and guidance for the fourth quarter. Following our
prepared remarks, we will open the call for questions.
With that, I would like to turn the call over to Tom.
 
Thomas Jeremiah Baltimore
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Thank you, Ian, and welcome, everyone. I am pleased to report another strong quarter where we delivered solid performance across our
portfolio as we saw strength across all demand segments. Lodging fundamentals continued their positive momentum into the third
quarter, supported by a strong labor market and healthy consumer and corporate balance sheets, which translated into steady growth in
business transient demand and stronger-than-expected group demand in the quarter, especially post Labor Day, as we witnessed
broad-based return to office trends and despite headline risk over increasing macro uncertainty, we currently do not see weakness in our
business with continued improvements to group, business transient and international demand for the fourth quarter and beyond.
Also for the quarter, we remain laser-focused on our capital recycling priorities, and I'm pleased to report that we closed on 3 noncore
asset sales since July for total proceeds of approximately $58 million, taking our year-to-date net proceeds to approximately $317 million
from the sales of our interest in 7 hotels. And despite recent choppiness in the debt markets, interest in hotel real estate remains high,
and we expect to execute on additional noncore asset sales, including potential deals in excess of $100 million, and these would bring
our total net amount of closed and pending dispositions for the year to over $500 million, well within our expanded target discussed last
quarter. Once closed, our liquidity position would exceed $2 billion, which we believe will give us the optionality to pivot between defense
and offense during these uncertain economic times.
From an operations standpoint, we continue to benefit from the efficiency measures we implemented over the last 2 years with total
labor cost pacing below 2019 levels, despite increases to both wage rates and benefits, translating into an expected 15% reduction in
labor costs for the full year 2022 versus 2019. As we have noted before, we are confident that the $85 million of expense savings, nearly
300 basis points of margin improvement achieved over the last 3 years are permanent, leading to meaningful gains as the portfolio
returns to prior peak levels. We also continue to focus on unlocking the embedded value of our portfolio through our value-enhancing
ROI pipeline.
At Bonnet Creek, our $110 million meeting space expansion includes 2 new stand-alone ballrooms. The ballroom at the Waldorf Astoria
is scheduled to open next month, and initial feedback from meeting planners has been enthusiastic. And at the Signia Hilton, we are
adding 90,000 square feet of multifunctional meeting space, which is expected to be ready for use by early 2024. In addition to the
ballroom expansion, we plan to invest an incremental $80 million on a comprehensive renovation of the complex, which includes all
1,500 guest rooms, all public space and updates to our signature golf course with all work expected to be completed by early 2024.
Overall, this considerable investment is expected to help solidify the complex's position as one of the best in Orlando. In addition, we
have initiated plans for full-scale renovation of the Casa Marina resort in Key West, a $70 million project, which will include a
transformation of the public spaces and guest rooms and the addition of a new ocean-front restaurant. We expect to start construction in
May of next year with a targeted completion date of early December 2023, in time for the peak holiday travel season. We are incredibly
excited about the transformative ROI project for this iconic resort.
Turning to our quarterly results. Third quarter pro forma RevPAR increased 62% year-over-year, having recovered to nearly 91% of 2019
levels. Performance continues to be led by strong leisure trends with RevPAR at our resort hotels finishing 14% above 2019 during the
third quarter as rates exceeded 2019 levels by 23%. Occupancy was within 93% of 2019 levels. Our 2 Hawaii hotels recorded an average
RevPAR increase of 13% over the third quarter of 2019, with the Hilton Hawaiian Village reaching average occupancies in the mid-90s in
July and August and an all-time monthly high of $354 in ADR for July and on pace to achieve a near-record EBITDA.
This outstanding performance has occurred despite the lack of inbound international travelers, which has historically represented nearly
30% of the hotel's demand with 60% of this international demand historically coming from Japan. As we look ahead to 2023, the recent
easing of travel restrictions in Japan is expected to finally drive the return of Japanese guests to our Hawaii and West Coast hotels,
providing a welcome tailwind for the portfolio. At our urban hotels, we continue to witness material improvements in demand with
occupancy increasing nearly 400 basis points sequentially over the second quarter to end the quarter at 68%. Our urban portfolio
witnessed particularly strong performance post Labor Day, driven by return to office trends in major markets, which translated into
average occupancy of approximately 71% in September.
Corporate negotiated revenue continued to improve across the portfolio for the quarter, increasing to 72% of 2019 levels compared to
64% last quarter, driven almost exclusively by occupancy gains. We have been especially impressed with the robust recovery taking place
in New York with occupancy exceeding 74% during the quarter, up 500 basis points from the second quarter, while September RevPAR
finished nearly 2% ahead of 2019 levels as occupancies surged to over 88% and rate was over 10% above 2019 for the same time period.
We expect the positive momentum to continue into the fourth quarter, driven in large part by a healthy pickup in group business, while
Q4 transient pace on the books is now 95% of 2019 levels on a pro forma basis, up from 83% reported 2 months ago.
In San Francisco, the recovery continues to take shape with an improving outlook. Third quarter occupancy improved nearly 1,400 basis
points sequentially to approximately 65%, driven in part to the nearly 40,000 Dreamforce attendees during the month of September,
with the event viewed as a major success for the city and signaled the first major citywide event since the start of the pandemic. That
said, rate continues to be challenged, trending 14% below 2019, due in part to the mix shift, which resulted in a third quarter RevPAR
decline of 41% to 2019. Excluding our 4 assets in San Francisco, third quarter RevPAR for our consolidated portfolio would have been just
2% shy of 2019 levels, accounting for a 700 basis point drag on overall performance.
Looking beyond the third quarter, the outlook for San Francisco continues to improve with fourth quarter occupancy forecasted to reach
the upper 60s. While RevPAR GAAP 2019 is expected to narrow to 29% of our 2019 levels by December. A vast improvement from the
90% RevPAR decline to 2019 recorded in January of this year.
Looking to 2023, the outlook for San Francisco is encouraging the city set to benefit from a much stronger convention calendar of close
to 640,000 group room nights forecasted for next year or a 63% increase over 2022. Looking more closely at the group segment. We
continue to witness positive group trends across the portfolio, illustrated by incremental bookings and lead volume improvement, with
stronger conversion rates across the portfolio. This was especially evident post Labor Day, but September group pickup for 2023 coming
in 106% ahead of the same period in 2019 for 2020 and with group ADR projected to be 40% higher.
Generally speaking, group demand is coming more heavily from higher-rated corporate group with leads in this segment accounting for
almost 2/3 of new demand double the historic volume mix in 2019. Group pickup trends for future periods also continued to improve
during the third quarter with definite bookings for the fourth quarter increasing by $21 million, with more than half of the new bookings
coming in September alone.
Q4 2022 group pace currently sits at 77% of 2019, a pickup of 800 basis points since June with definite bookings increase by over 90,000
room nights since the second quarter. For the year, definite bookings increased sequentially by nearly 10% to over $1.7 million, over 3x
the amount for the same time last year.
Looking ahead to 2023, citywide calendars continue to improve in most markets with Honolulu, Chicago, San Diego, Boston, San
Francisco, Seattle and Denver, all showing growth ahead of 2022 levels. As a result, we have witnessed a meaningful pickup in forward
group bookings for 2023 with hotels adding over $51 million of group revenue into next year during the quarter. Currently, group pace for
2023 increased to 75% of 2019 levels or 300 basis points higher than what we reported during the second quarter.
Looking over to the balance of this year. We remain very optimistic that the recovery remains on track. We continue to witness improving
operating trends across our portfolio and believe our portfolio will continue to benefit from the broader demand trends that favor
outsized growth in business transient and group demand, and we expect to benefit from our reimagined operating model, ROI pipeline
and capital recycling efforts, all of which should help to support strong earnings growth over the next few years.
And now I'd like to turn the call over to Sean who will provide some additional color on operations, along with an update on our balance
sheet and guidance for the fourth quarter.
 
Sean M. Dell'Orto
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
Thanks, Tom. Overall, we are pleased with third quarter results, which were in line with expectations, as leisure continues to lead
performance, along with ongoing improvements across our urban markets, the trend we expect to continue throughout the fourth
quarter and accelerate into 2023. Pro forma RevPAR for the third quarter was $171, 8.8% below 2019 levels, driven by widespread
improvements in demand, with pro forma occupancy improving sequentially by 80 basis points to 71.7% and pro forma rates continuing
to improve to $239 for the quarter or 7% above the same period in 2019.
Looking ahead to the fourth quarter, preliminary results in October look strong, with occupancy averaging approximately 74%, a nearly
200 basis point sequential improvement over September, while average daily rate during the month is projected to be approximately
$243 or 4% above '19. Overall, preliminary RevPAR for the month of October stands at $179 or less than 10% below 2019 levels. Although
if you were to exclude San Francisco, October RevPAR is 0.4% above 2019.
Total pro forma hotel revenues for the portfolio were $642 million during the third quarter, while pro forma hotel adjusted EBITDA was
$166 million, resulting in pro forma hotel adjusted EBITDA margin of nearly 26%. Margins were negatively impacted by demand softness
in San Francisco where our hotels have relatively higher fixed costs, which drove a 200 basis point drag on the portfolio.
Finally, damage and disruption to operations from Hurricanes Fiona and Ian were minimal with Q3 RevPAR impacted by 20 basis points
and adjusted EBITDA impacted by less than $2 million. Our hurricane preparedness team's efforts to protect our guests, hotel employees
and assets allowed operations to resume safely and quickly after the storms had passed.
Turning to the balance sheet. We have continued to make meaningful enhancements to liquidity and financial flexibility. As Tom noted
earlier, our liquidity as of quarter end was approximately $1.9 billion, including more than $900 million available on our revolver and $1
billion of cash on hand, and we expect total liquidity to exceed $2 billion following the closing of our pending asset sales. Net debt sits at
$3.9 billion, nearly $300 million lower since the beginning of the year. We are currently working with our banking partners to extend our
revolver, which we expect to finalize within the next couple of weeks, while evaluating several opportunities to address our $725 million
CMBS loan, which matures late next year.
With respect to additional near-term maturities, we have 2 small mortgage loans coming due next year, totaling just over $100 million,
and we expect to pay off those balances with available cash on hand as we continue to move towards a more unsecured capital structure.
Turning to guidance. For Q4, we are establishing RevPAR guidance of roughly $163 to $166 or 92% of 2019 levels at the midpoint. While
we continue to witness improving trends across several key urban markets, especially New York, Boston and New Orleans, we expect San
Francisco will negatively impact Q4 RevPAR performance relative to 2019 by approximately 850 basis points, partially driven by a tough
comparison with the timing of the Dreamforce citywide being held in September of this year versus October of 2019 when over 100,000
attendees participated in the event.
For the bottom line, we are establishing adjusted EBITDA guidance between $140 million and $155 million, translating to AFFO per
share between $0.35 and $0.43 to for the quarter. Our hotel adjusted EBITDA margins are expected to fall within a range of 24% to 25%
or 470 basis points below 2019 at the midpoint. Note, however, that Q4 2019 margins benefited from $21 million of business interruption
insurance proceeds, we received that quarter for our Key West and Caribe Hilton hotels impacted by Hurricanes Irma and Maria.
Excluding those payments, the margin gap between Q4 2022 versus Q4 2019 would be 270 basis points.
Also note that our guidance considers recently closed asset sales which contributed approximately $1 million to our quarterly earnings
and approximately $1 million of business interruption in the fourth quarter related to Hurricane Ian.
Finally, I wanted to provide additional guidance for our fourth quarter dividend. While it remains subject to Board approval, we currently
expect the dividend to range between $0.21 and $0.26 per share, of which approximately $0.07 to $0.12 per share relates to distributions
from operations. And the remaining $0.14 per share relates to gains from assets sold this year.
This concludes our prepared remarks. We will now open the line for Q&A.
(Operator Instructions)
Operator, can we have the first question, please?
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
 
Operator
(Operator Instructions)
Our first question is from the line of Smedes Rose from Citi.
 
Smedes Rose
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - Director & Senior Analyst
I just -- you mentioned that the forward group bookings for '23 are running at about 75% of 2019 levels, a little bit of a sequential
improvement. I was just wondering, is that rooms on the books or is that a revenue number? And then could you just talk a little bit more
about what you're hearing from corporate clients and kind of maybe a little bit about the booking window?
 
Thomas Jeremiah Baltimore
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Great question, Smedes. I hope you're well. As we mentioned during the prepared remarks, so group pace is up for '23 at about 75.4%.
It's about 300 basis points increase. That represents revenue. And if you think back to some of the markets, obviously, San Francisco,
Florida, across our portfolio, New York, New Orleans, Chicago, Hawaii, all continue to show really strong performance. So it's very
encouraging from that standpoint.
In terms of corporate negotiated rates, I mean, obviously, those are ongoing and occurring now. I know some of our peers have used
numbers in the 7% to 9% range. And we certainly would find that to be reasonable. But again, those discussions are ongoing now as we
prepare, obviously, for the budgeting season. But we're very encouraged by what we're seeing on the group side. And again, sequentially,
that's an improvement. And fully expected that, that's going to continue to accelerate as we move out into later this quarter and certainly
into 2023.
 
Smedes Rose
Citigroup Inc., Research Division - Director & Senior Analyst
Okay. And then, Sean, maybe could you just talk a little bit more about how you're thinking about the refinancing of the debt on the San
Francisco assets? You mentioned it comes due next year. And maybe sort of help us think about the cost versus the 4% or so that's in
place now?
 
Sean M. Dell'Orto
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
Sure. Yes. We're certainly looking at a few different market, Smedes, and some other options as well in terms of working with the current
situation. So I would say that as we look at the markets, whether it's bank, financing, or call it, CMBS, anything that's kind of in that kind
of high single-digit debt yields, you're probably looking at, call it, $350 million to $400 million over SOFR. So that's kind of in the
ballpark of kind of the cost. And again, we're looking at more sale, probably a mortgage type of situation with an unencumbered assets
like the Bonnet Creek Complex as a solution. Clearly, we'll continue to monitor the bond market as well. Obviously, not pricing what we
would be looking to do now. But if things kind of calm down and normalize a little bit, maybe you can see that as an opportunity, but I
think more focused on kind of a mortgage route going forward with the pricing I just discussed.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from the line of Danny Asad from Bank of America.
 
Dany Asad
BofA Securities, Research Division - VP & Research Analyst
I have a quick question. So my first one is on RevPAR. Maybe just help us kind of think through -- you gave us the full Q4 RevPAR guide
of down 8% versus '19. And then we know October downtown. Can you just help us walk through kind of how you expect November and
December to progress sequentially?
 
Sean M. Dell'Orto
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
We've kind of -- we've talked through 7 to 9 down, Dany. Obviously, we'll look at October being down closer to, call it, 10%. Again, we
mentioned on our call -- or on the script, I should say, that San Francisco is certainly a good drag there, and ultimately, without it we
being up slightly. So I think as you look kind of into November and December, I think you see a sequential improvement down to the
mid-single digits, clearly, as we go through the quarter.
 
Dany Asad
BofA Securities, Research Division - VP & Research Analyst
Got it. And then my other one is on margins. So if you kind of look at the -- if we adjust for the BI proceeds in '19, you're kind of shaking
out to somewhere that directionally looks like it's about 100 basis points lower versus '19 in Q4 compared to Q3. Can you maybe just help
us understand how much of that is seasonality? How much of that is as the urban cores of the country kind of recover, if there's a little bit
of mix shift going on and just kind of how to understand how that is going to progress?
 
Sean M. Dell'Orto
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
Yes. As you think about mix shift, we're roughly down 300 basis points in group relative to -- Q2 was down 140. That was certainly a
better quarter at similar shift to '19 as Q3. But as you think kind of a flow-through, I think we'll continue to kind of see improving
flow-through as we bring some occupancy back. And so I think for the most part, we feel pretty good about where the markets are going,
but obviously, it's a tough comp given Q4, given the San Francisco drag as well as the BI that we saw for Caribe especially in Q4 2019, as
you mentioned.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from the line of Dori Kesten from Wells Fargo.
 
Dori Lynn Kesten
Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, Research Division - Senior Analyst
What would you expect to spend over the next 2 years on maintenance and ROI? And what returns are you expecting on the ROI projects
you mentioned in your prepared remarks?
 
Thomas Jeremiah Baltimore
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Generally, we're on a normalized basis, Dori, about 6% of revenue. We've always been on the higher end, just given the nature of the
portfolio. Revenue is that's one starting point. Obviously, that was disrupted, obviously, during the pandemic. If you think about what's in
the pipeline right now. Obviously, we're wrapping up Bonnet Creek. There's another $80 million that we talked about in the $70 million.
So you're a few hundred million. Back of the envelope, I think, would be a good planning for what's in the pipeline. We are laser focused,
as we've said, in terms of priorities. Selling noncore, we're making really good progress there. You'll continue to hear more about that in
the coming weeks and using those proceeds to delever, but at the same time, reinvest back into the portfolio, particularly with our ROI
projects and quite optimistic and really encouraged by that.
And then, of course, we'll look for other capital allocation that could also include buybacks on a leverage-neutral basis. But obviously,
the priority is getting down the leverage and certainly reinvesting back into the portfolio. So a few hundred depending on how many
other projects we launch. We've got the DoubleTree project in San Jose and converting that. It's in a planning phase now. Given the
uncertainty, we clearly are committed to getting the Bonnet Creek resort and that expansion done, it's well underway. And as we
mentioned, the Waldorf ballroom will open next month. And obviously, the Hilton Signia in about another 13 months plus or minus. And
then we're also are completely renovating the guest rooms, the public space, and of course, our world-class golf course as well. Casa
Marina, we've had enormous success with the reach, the sister property there. We expect that we will have at least that, if not better, with
a complete renovation of the Casa Marina as well.
 
Dori Lynn Kesten
Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, Research Division - Senior Analyst
And just digging into two of your larger markets. Given what you know about the convention calendar in San Francisco for next year, and
hopefully, the pending return of Japanese travelers to Honolulu, what kind of tailwinds you imagine that there could be as a result in
RevPAR for '23?
 
Thomas Jeremiah Baltimore
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Yes, it's a great question. I mean if you think about San Francisco, I mean I realize there's a lot of energy around it. I'm in fact, leaving
here and headed out West and been out there many times as many know, but we are cautiously optimistic. I mean if you think about the
Parc 55 didn't reopen until May of this year. Obviously, the Hilton was also not until the end of '21. So you've got both of those sort of
ramping up. And we had RevPAR down 90% at the beginning of the year. And as we said, we expect that RevPAR will be down probably
inside of 30% by the end of the year. That is ramping up quite nicely.
And when you think about the citywides, there's $640,000 room nights expected. It's about 63% of really the all-time high in '19, coupled
with probably 130,000 room nights approximately already on the books at that complex. So we would certainly expect a pretty dramatic
increase. With a market like that with only 30,000 rooms and clearly, our complex there accounts for 10% of it. Having that -- having
anchored with citywides, coupled with internal group, allows us the great opportunity to really yield out the transient.
So I don't have a revenue RevPAR figure for you today, but it really sets up nicely for a significant tailwind there. Hawaii is -- if you look
about Hilton Hawaiian Village, it's just an extraordinary -- I would respectfully submit, certainly one of the more valued assets in all of
lodging. When we think about that asset where we still don't have the Japanese traveler back, but we're -- and we're probably going to
be flat to RevPAR this year, we're still expecting to be at or near an all-time high in EBITDA. So we are very encouraged by what we're
seeing there. Now a lot of that has been certainly, domestic travel, but it's also been in other international. International is normally
about 30% of that asset. It's about 10% this year is what we're tracking. And the Japanese traveler now will have been gone for nearly 3
years. And historically, they stay longer and spend more.
So we think that there's a tremendous tailwind. Waikoloa has been 20% to 30% increase in RevPAR, and if you think about Hilton
Hawaiian Village, which essentially will end the year, it was up 7%, I believe, in the third quarter, but we'll probably end the year probably
just flat to slightly negative. So I certainly would expect a double-digit increase in RevPAR as we look out, assuming obviously the
economy remains -- the economy remains healthy, which is what we believe today, absent any significant changes.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from the line of Anthony Powell from Barclays.
 
Anthony Franklin Powell
Barclays Bank PLC, Research Division - Research Analyst
Just a question on New York. I mean, I think you highlighted how the market is recovering very strongly and the revenues are coming
back very quickly. Question on margins there. I still see that the margins are kind of trailing. What's the opportunity left there to kind of
maybe improve the operating structure of that property? I know that was a big topic of discussion pre-COVID. So where are we in that
process now?
 
Thomas Jeremiah Baltimore
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
That's a great question, Anthony. I mean look, we have spent a lot of time and a great credit to our asset management team. We've been
working with our operating partners and looking for ways to continue to streamline operations. And room service is a great example
where it's sort of more of a knock and drop or we have limited food and beverage. Obviously, we've got significant food and beverage as it
relates to the group meeting and the banquet business, but really thinking about the business differently. The pandemic forced all of us
to better communication, better collaboration among the brands as well as the management companies. And we're anchored, as we've
said, in the $85 million in savings and the 1,200 jobs that have been eliminated. And a lot of that is really in food and beverage and
taking out assistant managers and taking out sales and marketing costs that candidly had become a bit accelerated over time.
So clearly, as you see occupancy continue to rise, we'll see the full benefit of those margin improvements, but it's a really different
operating structure than what we have today. We are very encouraged by what's happening in New York. I would remind listeners,
everyone was sort of writing off, I think, both New York and San Francisco and other urban markets 6 months ago, a year ago through the
pandemic. And I think New York is a great indication that it's coming back and I think coming back pretty strongly. I mean, we were -- if
you think about where we were at the first quarter of occupancy, I think it was in the low 30s, second quarter at 69%. Obviously, the third
quarter at 74%, and we're expecting probably Q4 to be in the low to mid-80s as an example. So I'd say that's ramping up nicely.
And as we communicated on the San Francisco story continue to see that as well, though certainly San Francisco is lagging for the
reasons that we've noted, but New York is coming roaring back and the city has been fully activated. And having really one of only three
big boxes in the city really gives us a really a competitive advantage and a foothold there. So we are quite optimistic about New York as
we move forward.
 
Sean M. Dell'Orto
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
And I would just quickly add that we certainly expect things to improve for Q4. As Tom mentioned, with occupancy kind of improving. We
saw occupancy down 26 points in Q3, and we expected it to be down more closer to 11 points in Q4. So getting the occupancy up, we'll
certainly improve the margins. I think we'll still slowly have a gap. But also as we look at Q4, we're still down 20% on group revenue. So
you got to get the occupancy up and got to get the group mix more normalized to kind of get to the margins. But I would say that we're
looking at middle to high double digits or teens, I should say, for Q4 margins versus what was kind of high single digits for Q3.
 
Anthony Franklin Powell
Barclays Bank PLC, Research Division - Research Analyst
And maybe on San Francisco. Can you remind us how important business transient is to that market? And where [Big DT] is right now,
could there be any risk of some headwinds there next year? We keep seeing layoff kind of announcements from Twitter Stripe and
whatnot, there's maybe a BT kind of slowdown or reversal in the market. Could that maybe offset some of the strength you're seeing in
group next year?
 
Thomas Jeremiah Baltimore
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Yes. I think, Anthony, if you look historically, I mean, I think the real benefit of San Francisco was having, obviously, supply constrained, a
great convention market in following, having a strong leisure and a strong business transient. So I wouldn't say it's clearly 1/3 of 1/3 of
1/3. So I don't have the data in front of me. But if you look historically, it's been a strong market as any. And particularly, as I think back to
2006 through 2019 certainly was among the top 3 markets. And really, it was those strong sources of demand. No doubt that given
what's happening on the tech side, certainly will be felt a little more in San Francisco. But the fundamentals of getting the convention
market back getting kind of return to office. We know that that's lagging. I know that the mayor and others are really pushing, but I
wouldn't write off San Francisco over the intermediate and long-term. I've said that before and certainly stand by it.
We continue to monitor and study the market carefully. And we're not bearing our head in the sand. We are out there, and we are seeing
some green shoots and some positive things. We certainly want to see that accelerate in 2023 and beyond.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from the line of Duane Pfennigwerth from Evercore ISI.
 
Duane Thomas Pfennigwerth
Evercore ISI Institutional Equities, Research Division - Senior MD
On the Japanese inbound traveler, I wonder, historically, are there any differences in sort of the peak seasonality of that traveler? Or does
it line up pretty closely with peaks in Hawaii overall?
 
Thomas Jeremiah Baltimore
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Duane, it's a great question. If you think historically, it's been about $9 million, $8 million to $10 million, let's use $9 million is kind of
inbound into Hawaii about 60%, 62% coming from the U.S., second largest market really coming out of Japan, kind of $1.5 million, plus
or minus. And look, it's been consistent for 30 years, plus or minus, particularly into that asset. And you've got generations coming, they
tend to stay longer and pay more.
In terms of seasonality, I think it's been pretty consistent. I don't know whether Sean's got additional data on it. But obviously, the tour
operators have been a good part of it. But I think it really dovetails nicely. And given the capacity, we clearly have the capacity to
accommodate that demand whenever it comes.
 
Sean M. Dell'Orto
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
I think you see a little bit of blip in the spring around Golden Week on Japan. But I think, as Tom said, it's generally pretty consistent
across travel, normal kind of vacation times.
 
Duane Thomas Pfennigwerth
Evercore ISI Institutional Equities, Research Division - Senior MD
The reason I ask, it's -- we've seen some airlines try and launch Hawaii service, some successfully, some less successfully, and it just
tends to be -- I think the learning is it tends to be a longer lead time purchase consideration. To your point, you don't go to Hawaii for a
weekend, most of the time, you go for a longer period of time. And so I would expect there's a longer lead time in those purchase
decisions as we think about travel restrictions going away. So it may just be a little too early to measure the success or failure of those
easing travel restrictions.
My follow-up is...
 
Thomas Jeremiah Baltimore
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Duane, if I could -- just to unpack that a little bit. I think it's a great point. But as I said, you've got north of 30 years, if not more, are really
consistent. I mean if you look at those travel patterns coming out of Japan, it's been a loyal, consistent, easy-to-get-to on a relative basis.
And so when you look at that pattern now this will have been the third year where they've been virtually shut out. So I mean I would
respectfully submit that as we saw in the U.S. with that sort of pent-up demand, I would expect similar behavior. So the airlines will
respond to that demand as we saw, certainly respond here in the U.S., although some did it better than others, but we're quite
encouraged. And despite that, I mean, obviously, we've got a resort here that has -- continues to be an extraordinary performer. And we
would expect when we get the Japanese traveler back that we will -- it will continue to accelerate that RevPAR growth. And we really
haven't seen the RevPAR growth at some of our other leisure markets that other of our peers have seen. So we see that as a real tailwind
for Parc as we move into '23 and beyond.
 
Duane Thomas Pfennigwerth
Evercore ISI Institutional Equities, Research Division - Senior MD
That makes sense. And then just I apologize if you've covered this in another question. But Sean, could you maybe just give us CapEx or
capital spending 2022, 2023?
 
Sean M. Dell'Orto
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
I mean ultimately, Tom covered that. I'll let Tom kind of...
 
Thomas Jeremiah Baltimore
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Yes. We've certainly, Duane, we always had 6% of revenues, certainly higher than normal, in Parc just given the nature of this portfolio.
And as I said, we've got pending ROI projects that are active. And I said for planning, it's certainly a few hundred million dollars is a good
base number to use, and that can flex depending on when we accelerate the Casa Marina with the complete transformation that we're
planning for next summer. And of course, closing out the additional $80 million to finish up Bonnet Creek, which is going to be a
complete rooms redo or the golf course, which we're quite excited about is we really position that world-class resort there in Orlando and
certainly be as competitive as any other property there.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from the line of Chris Woronka from Deutsche Bank.
 
Chris Jon Woronka
Deutsche Bank AG, Research Division - Research Analyst
First question was, I don't know, maybe we can zoom in on San Francisco Group a little bit, Tom. I think you've given us a lot of data
points and some encouraging, but I think on the rate side, right, not where we want it to be. Is this some kind of structural issue where
San Francisco, from a group perspective, has become more of a value city and the higher dollar has gone to Vegas. And the question in
that is it kind of matters for you guys, right? You need -- you want the higher-rated premium groups to really drive the EBITDA recovery
there.
 
Thomas Jeremiah Baltimore
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Yes. I'm not sure that I would agree with that thesis, Chris. I mean, look, Vegas works, I think, for certain groups. But if you think about
some of the high-end educational base, pharma and you think about the audience in San Francisco, I mean they've historically had -- if
you think back to 2006 through 2019 in Vegas was still strong at that point. San Francisco more than held its own. I would think it's been
the pandemic, the unfortunate negative narrative that got away from the city. I do think the city is correcting, whether it's street
conditions or homeless, some of the safety and security issues. And you know that many of us have been out there and many other
business leaders, men and women have also, I certainly know that the city gets that, and I think they're moving in the right direction.
So I certainly would not -- and given the fact that you've got a market that has 30,000 rooms in the CBD, take New York, it's 120,000 or
more, so you have natural opportunity for real compression there. Obviously, for our portfolio and our complex, it certainly makes sense
to have citywides anchored with in-house group and then the ability to really yield that transient. So we are encouraged. I mean the
group pace this year is in the low 30% group pace next year, it's north of 50%. I think about 130,000 room nights because I think the
number that I gave in citywides are at about 640,000, which is about 63% of '19, which was an all-time high. So encouraging.
Look, we need San Francisco that performance to continue to accelerate. As I remind the listeners, remember that Parc 55 was closed for
27 months. It didn't open until May of this year. And there were many who made the comment that New York and San Francisco and
others wouldn't be back until '25, '26 or later. I think it's fair to say that based on what we're seeing in New York and even the early
signals here in San Francisco that we certainly think that's going to happen before then.
 
Sean M. Dell'Orto
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
Yes. I mean one thing I would add, Chris, is if you look at Q1, certainly start with Q1 pace for '23 relative to pre-pandemic levels, we were
up part of the complex 8% on rate or pace. So I think, again, coming from where it's been, I think it's very encouraging, and it's -- and I
think it also is encouraging is what we saw the activity for -- in the month of September for booking for '23 for San Francisco, which really
represented about 14% of the total rooms added that month and ultimately 20% of the revenue. So we got average rates of $433 booked
for San Francisco for all of 23%. I think some of that obviously is probably going into Q1 for JPMorgan. But in the end, it's an average rate
of $433, which is 30% higher than the numbers we're seeing on the 8% pace I talked to you about -- I just mentioned. So I think again,
encouraging and in the right direction with Francisco on the group side.
 
Chris Jon Woronka
Deutsche Bank AG, Research Division - Research Analyst
Sure. Great. Super helpful. Just as a follow-up, how do we think about some of the puts and takes on margins going forward? I mean
we're going to have higher occupancy next year, hopefully, rate mix could be, I guess, depends on your perspective, could be positive,
could be negative. And really, what I'm asking is whether it's kind of group margins on some of the ancillary stuff or even some brand
initiatives, I don't know if you're continuing to work with Hilton and I guess the other brands to a lesser extent on further things, whether
it's cost of [royalty] or other that could be helpful going forward?
 
Sean M. Dell'Orto
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
I think it's a number of things, Chris, if you think about building this back. I mean clearly, occupancy, you're at a level where you're
ranging in that 70%. So you kind of get into that point where you're going to have a lot of your layered fixed cost and then you're going to
basically, with added volume, just flow that better. I think we continue to see rate growth in certain markets. Obviously, you think about
San Francisco in the drag that it is. I mean, if you think about it coming back, so it's going to rule soon, lift our RevPAR to '19 in our rates.
And so I think as you think about the flow-through for our business, again, getting the mix in there with group, which is continually about
300 basis points less than what it's been in '19 and therefore, getting the banquet and catering revenue coming through. I think you
certainly see a lot of opportunity for this to continue to grow and obviously go beyond where we were in '19, as we've discussed with the
changes we made and the staffing changes that we've made.
So I think we certainly see -- continue to see growth, obviously, with the business still performing and we'll put aside the macro
discussion for the moment with this. But I think in the end, we have certainly a path here towards getting to certainly higher margins that
we're seeing here today.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from the line of Neil Malkin from Capital One Securities.
 
Neil Lawrence Malkin
Capital One Securities, Inc., Research Division - Analyst
Just maybe some clarity on the potential additional dispositions that you've talked about. Can you maybe highlight or give us some color
on -- are those just sort of the noncore, maybe not the upper upscale full service? Are they the one-off markets, JVs, maybe potentially a
reshuffling of the portfolio, reducing some exposure to troubled unionized markets that lag? Any help on that side of the ledger would be
great.
 
Thomas Jeremiah Baltimore
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Neil, it's a fair question, but let me also just say, we've got a number of people in the queue here, and we want to try to give answers to as
many questions as we can. And I know we're stacked up with a lot of other companies reporting today. Respectfully, no team has sold
and moved more assets than we have since the spin. We're up to 38 assets now and $2 billion international, 14 of those as you know,
South Africa, Brazil, Germany, 7 in the U.K., a joint venture in Dublin. I mean we've seen it all and done it all.
So we've worked on. A lot of credit to our the men and women on our development team and investment team that have worked really
hard. Every one of the deals has legal tax, other complexities. So it's a combination. We are constantly working on reshaping this
portfolio. So I would say that there are assets over $100 million. They're noncore to what we would say long-term holding. We are not
looking at this point, if your question is about some of the big urban boxes, we don't think now is the time. They're big. They're
complicated. There are tax and legal issues and with the debt markets where they are. We think there are other assets that are
marketable, noncore, plenty of debt sources in private equity and/or owner operators and family offices.
And I think we've shown a real skill in being able to sell and also do it efficiently and at pricing that makes sense. We're not a distressed
seller. We're doing this thoughtfully and prudently, and we set a goal of $200 million to $300 million. We've already exceeded that.
We've raised it now to $500 million, and we're confident we'll be able to deliver that and continue to use those proceeds to certainly
delever and reinvest back into the portfolio.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from the line of Robin Farley from UBS.
 
Robin Margaret Farley
UBS Investment Bank, Research Division - MD and Research Analyst
I just wanted to -- in your release, you talked about the asset sales and how given that you've been successful at selling more than you
had targeted, that you might pivot between being defensive and offensive. And I'm just curious, is that suggesting that maybe you would
be thinking about making acquisitions? Or I don't know if that was more just about reducing leverage and reinvestment? But it sounded
like pivoting between defense and offense could mean you're potentially interested in making an acquisition.
 
Thomas Jeremiah Baltimore
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Yes. We'd love to make an acquisition at the right time, Robin. Remind listeners, again, we've sold the 38 assets for $2 billion, we
obviously bolted on Chesapeake for those 18 hotels for $2.5 billion. So we've really been a net acquirer. It's just been silent here as we
work through the pandemic. The priorities are, again, getting the revolver done. Sean and team are making great progress there, selling
noncore, reinvesting back into our portfolio. And then again, as I said, we will have -- as we have done, we'll look at buybacks depending
on where the share price is. And clearly, we trade at a huge discount today. And if we can do some buybacks on a leverage-neutral basis,
we'll certainly continue to look there. And not lost on us given all of the uncertainty. Part of the reason why we want to continue to build
tremendous liquidity is that there will be a time when pivoting to go on offense makes sense, and Parc will be ready and Parc will be
active at that time. We don't think that, that is necessarily today, this quarter.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from the line of Patrick Scholes from Truist.
 
Charles Patrick Scholes
Truist Securities, Inc., Research Division - MD of Lodging, Gaming and Leisure Equity Research & Analyst
There've been a number of sizable acquisitions amongst your public REIT peers over the last several quarters. I noticed your folks have
not been terribly active in the acquisition market. And I'm just curious as to your thoughts and rationale, why you've decided to perhaps
take a pause. And again, this is not saying that's right or wrong. I'm just curious as to what is your internal thinking of why you have not
been active in that?
 
Thomas Jeremiah Baltimore
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Yes. Well, thanks, Patrick. As you know, I'm not going to comment on other deals, and I'll let them speak for themselves. I think we've
been pretty consistent in what the priorities are for Park. And we really wanted to use the pandemic and the post-pandemic to reimagine
the operating model. As Sean pointed out, as we get occupancy back and we get later in this recovery, we are confident that we're going
to see permanent savings and real value there. We want to continue to reshape the portfolio in selling and recycling that capital, and
we've sold 38. We'll continue to sell some of the noncore. Our top 27 assets really account for about 90% of the value of the portfolio. So
cleaning it up we think that makes sense.
And the highest and best use of those proceeds is really reinvesting back into our portfolio, whether that's through the ROI or that's
through targeted buybacks on a neutral -- leverage neutral basis. There will come a time when we will be a buyer. We just don't think
that time makes sense right now for Park. And if you think about since the spin, we really have been more of a net buyer than seller given
the fact that we bought $2.5 billion versus selling the $2 billion. And then also, obviously, we've had a ton of buybacks over that period of
time as well. So I'll stop there, and hopefully, that answers your question.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from the line of Bill Crow from Raymond James.
 
William Andrew Crow
Raymond James & Associates, Inc., Research Division - Analyst
There's little I'd like discussion better with you than some of the big picture issues. I'm just curious whether we might be talking about
group and the recovery in San Francisco or Chicago or D.C. If that's not maybe missing the point here that we might be undergoing a
larger paradigm shift and where groups might be heading. And I'm thinking about markets like Tampa, Nashville, Austin, Denver and
whether we're thinking about some of these old entrenched group markets. Maybe that's just wrong going forward. I'd just love to get
your opinion on that.
 
Thomas Jeremiah Baltimore
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Yes. Bill, I'd love and I'd love to schedule a follow-up, and have this discussion with you. I just don't think they're mutually exclusive. I
mean I don't disagree with you that there are some really compelling things happening in Nashville or Phoenix and Austin. As you know
my past life for one of the largest owners of hotels in Austin, so I know it well. But I would also say that there are true and tried markets
and infrastructure capacity in Chicago, in Boston, in San Francisco and Atlanta that have worked and are really part of the rotation DC.
And there are reasons why those associations and/or those groups need to be or want to be in those markets with great airlift and other
reasons. So I don't think they're mutually exclusive. And I think we're going to have to see over time. And I would respectfully submit that
if you look historically at some of those top markets, and I put Orlando in that there's a cycle and a rotation, and I would fully expect the
Boston's and D.C.'s and San Francisco's and Chicago's to continue to be part of that. Now there's no doubt, and we won't get an
argument here, Bill, about there are some structural challenges in some of these cities that need to be addressed. No doubt about that.
And I think you and I have had it. And I would respectfully submit that I've tried to be constructive and I've been a voice and written letters
and made lots of comments on the subject, I think, as you know.
 
William Andrew Crow
Raymond James & Associates, Inc., Research Division - Analyst
No, I do. And I appreciate your advocacy for the industry. So that was it for me. I appreciate the time.
 
Thomas Jeremiah Baltimore
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
But I will schedule time with you Bill to continue this.
 
Operator
Our next question comes from the line of Jay Kornreich from SMBC.
 
Jay Bradley Kornreich
SMBC Nikko Securities America, Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
Can you provide some additional color on how you see the F&B revenue trending in 4Q and then the strength you see in this segment in
2023 as group demand and the convention calendar continues to ramp up?
 
Thomas Jeremiah Baltimore
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
I lost the first part of the question. We couldn't hear you. So if you could just repeat the first part again?
 
Jay Bradley Kornreich
SMBC Nikko Securities America, Inc., Research Division - Research Analyst
Yes, sure. I was asking about if you can provide some additional color about the -- how you see the F&B revenue trending in 4Q. And then
the strength of F&B in 2023 as group demand and the convention calendar continue to ramp up?
 
Sean M. Dell'Orto
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Executive VP, CFO & Treasurer
Yes. F&B will ultimately come through certainly better than we saw in Q3 as we look at Q4. Clearly, you kind of get into the season of
holiday season, whatnot. You see a little bit of some ramp-up in banquet and catering. It should ultimately kind of get to a point where
it's rivaling Q2 F&B revenue. So I think certainly, as you see -- clearly, as you see that mix more normalized on the group side as certainly,
our pace would demonstrate that we're continuing to see improvement year-over-year. Certainly, you're going to see the F&B side grow.
So we're certainly down significantly without the group mix in place there. So I think certainly as we go into next year, we'll certainly see
the group mix normalize and F&B revenues certainly more normalized to '19 levels as well.
 
Operator
Our next question is from the line of Chris Darling from Green Street.
 
Chris Darling
Green Street Advisors, LLC, Research Division - Analyst of Lodging
Tom, I appreciate the comments you gave on the transaction market already, but I'm just curious whether you could comment on any
value changes you may have seen over the past couple of months, obviously, being an active seller in the market. And then I wonder, if
possible, if you could delineate any of those changes across some of your major markets.
 
Thomas Jeremiah Baltimore
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Yes. It's a fair question. Obviously, given rising rates, cap rates come in, they expanded 25 bps, maybe 50 bps depending on, but we're
still seeing a really healthy market for hotel real estate. I know the private equity funds, and I may be off a little bit on my numbers, but I
think are sitting on about $400 billion of capital. You've got family offices. You've got owner-operators. So there is clearly demand. And
as you look for yield, I would believe that lodging and expect the lodging is going to continue to be an attractive asset class. Again, the
only so many industrial residential 3 cap deals you can do, and I think they get harder to do given where rates are.
So we haven't seen any sort of slowdown. I do think that deals that have a story that also have an opportunity that for perhaps with
management or unencumbered, tend to have perhaps a more bidding audience, but that's not always true. If it's a trophy asset, I think
those fully encumbered are expected. So it really depends on the submarket and the asset, but we're not having any issues or resistance
in transacting. And I think we've been as active as anybody. We're thoughtful about it. We go through a process. We certainly are
committed to make sure that we're maximizing value for shareholders. But we really are also committed to recycling capital and cleaning
up the portfolio, and it's been a lot of hard work.
People forget that we also had a laundry platform that we've also disposed of, and we had 4 assets that we were self-operating. All of
that has been cleaned up and great credit to Tom Morey, our Chief Investment Officer; and Nancy Wu, our General Counsel; and the men
and women on those teams have been working tirelessly over the last few years as we continue to reshape the portfolio. So it is a much
stronger portfolio than where we were 6 plus years ago when we were spun out.
 
Operator
Thank you. Ladies and gentlemen, we have reached the end of the question-and-answer session. And I would like to turn the conference
to Mr. Tom Baltimore, Chairman, President and CEO, for closing comments.
 
Thomas Jeremiah Baltimore
Park Hotels & Resorts Inc. - Chairman, President & CEO
Thank you. We appreciate everybody taking time today. We look forward to seeing many of you at Nareit and stay safe, and we'll see you
hopefully out in San Francisco.
 
Operator
Thank you. The conference of Park Hotels & Resorts, Inc. has now concluded. Thank you for your participation. You may now disconnect
your lines.
DISCLAIMER
Refinitiv reserves the right to make changes to documents, content, or other information on this web site without obligation to notify any person of such changes.
In the conference calls upon which Event Briefs are based, companies may make projections or other forward-looking statements regarding a variety of items. Such forward-looking statements are based
upon current expectations and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those stated in any forward-looking statement based on a number of important factors and risks,
which are more specifically identified in the companies' most recent SEC filings. Although the companies may indicate and believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are
reasonable, any of the assumptions could prove inaccurate or incorrect and, therefore, there can be no assurance that the results contemplated in the forward-looking statements will be realized.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN EVENT BRIEFS REFLECTS REFINITIV'S SUBJECTIVE CONDENSED PARAPHRASE OF THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL AND THERE MAY BE
MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE CONFERENCE CALLS. IN NO WAY DOES REFINITIV OR THE APPLICABLE COMPANY ASSUME
ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEB SITE OR IN ANY EVENT BRIEF. USERS ARE ADVISED TO
REVIEW THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S CONFERENCE CALL ITSELF AND THE APPLICABLE COMPANY'S SEC FILINGS BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.
2022 Refinitiv. All Rights Reserved.