Last night we reported first quarter 2021 FFO per share of $0.38, first quarter 2021 net income attributable to common stockholders per share of $0.02.
Without the charge for the early extinguishment of debt, our first quarter 2021 FFO per share would have been approximately $0.44.
Based on the current environment same-store metrics are down in retail as expected and office was also lower for the quarter, but it is expected to end with 8% or greater same-store cash NOI for the year ended 2021.
Finally, I want to mention that the Board of Directors has approved a quarterly dividend of $0.28 a share for the first quarter, consistent with our previous dividend, which is, we believe is supported by our collection efforts in the first quarter.
As we've worked our way through these past 12 months, however, we realized that it is the resiliency of our properties and our company's employees that has enabled us to weather this storm.
To date we have leased approximately 20% of those expiring units and expect to have the majority of them released by the end of summer.
Today, we have avoided any material impact from retailer bankruptcy having lost only 13,000 square feet in the aggregate out of our over 3 million square foot retail portfolio, which we believe is a testament to us having superior locations at these restructured tenants want to remain in.
I believe it is important to note that the FFO in the first quarter includes a charge of approximately $4.3 million for the early extinguishment of our $150 million Senior Guaranteed Notes, Series A, which were due on October 31, 2021.
We expect this collection trend to continue to improve going forward with April at approximately 90% to date.
Our collections have continued to improve each quarter since the pandemic began and improved each month in Q1 with the collection rate north of 93% for the first quarter.
We are feeling more bullish than at any time over the past 12 months, now that the vaccine is widely available, the COVID 19 governmental restrictions in our coastal markets have lightened considerably and we are seeing firsthand the consumer behavior has begun reverting closer to pre-pandemic levels.
Our top 10 office tenants represented 50.2% of our total office base rent.
Current status by region are as follows: Bellevue is 96.5% leased; Portland is 97.1% leased; San Francisco is 100% leased, net of One Beach; and San Diego is 89.1% leased with two buildings under renovation at Torrey Reserve making up 5.8% of San Diego's vacancy and 2.6% of the office portfolio's vacancy.
Furthermore, the 133 unit master lease with the private university in our San Diego multifamily portfolio expires at the end of May and our San Diego multifamily team led by Abigail Rex is fully engaged on additional marketing and advertising campaigns to entice students to remain in expiring units and to attract new prospects.
Furthermore, we had approximately $800,000 of deferred rent due from about 100 tenants in Q1 based on COVID-19 related lease modifications entered into in 2020 and we have collected approximately 88% of those deferred amount, we believe this further validates our strategy of supporting our struggling retailers through the government mandated closure.
At the end of the first quarter, net of One Beach, which is under redevelopment, our office portfolio stood at approximately 94% leased, with just 3.4% expiring through the end of 2021.