As we reported last night, total FFOM for the third quarter of 2020 was $45.2 million or $0.32 per fully diluted share.
First year student enrollment is only down 1.1% for fall.
Our rent collection rate improved to 97% in September, the first full month of the new academic year in most of our markets, from approximately 94% in Q2.
Within ACC's 68 markets, we are now tracking 21,150 beds currently under construction for 2021, of a potential additional 400 beds planned, but not yet under construction, reflecting a decline of 2% to 4% in new supply off the current year's decline in new supply of 20%.
While the company's near-term earnings will, of course, be affected by the governmental and university actions taken in response to the pandemic, we believe that we are on a path to return to a relative level of normalcy both operationally and financially after achieving over 90% for this fall despite the amount of ongoing online instruction as well as seeing significant reductions in delinquencies, refunds, and resident hardships as we have started the new academic year.
As expected, our third quarter other income was impacted by $8.4 million due to the loss of summer camp conference business, the continued waiver of online transaction fees and late payment fees, and higher levels of bad debt.
Of the half of our universities that had decreases in enrollment, they only averaged a 3.1% decline for fall 2020.
Our lease-up occupancy exceeded 90%, a level many believe to be a best-case scenario in the early days of this pandemic.
Overall, we've seen only a 0.3% decline in enrollment across those 58 markets.
Like last quarter, we cannot completely isolate every item related to the pandemic, but we believe FFOM was negatively impacted by approximately $19 million versus our original expectations for the quarter.
Although our leverage levels are temporarily elevated relative to the targets we have historically communicated, we feel confident that with the three-year capital plan we layout on Page S16 as well as the expected normalization of the EBITDA, the company's debt to total assets will return to the mid-30% range and net debt-to-EBITDA to the high five to low six times range.
During the quarter, we provided $2.1 million in rent refunds to on-campus residents at one ACE Partnership University, which we expect to decrease to $1.2 million in the fourth quarter.
And $12 million due to lower opening occupancy for the fall semester relative to our original expectations.
In regards to collections, we had a 97% collection rate on our rent charge for September, a significant improvement from the 93.7% seen during the second quarter.
With regard to same-store opex, we were able to partially offset lost revenue with savings and operating expenses of 5.2%, led by savings in all of our controllable categories.
Total property revenue was approximately $27 million impacted for the quarter, with $15 million due to COVID-related rent relief, lost summer camp revenue, increased bad debt, and wave fees.