We reported first quarter adjusted earnings per share of $1.39, more than double the year ago period.
For the quarter, there were about $0.17 per share of adjusted items for earnings per share purposes, which are referenced in slide 24 in the appendix.
Adjusted segment operating profit was $1.2 billion, 86% higher than the first quarter of 2020 and our sixth consecutive quarter of year-over-year adjusted OP growth.
Looking ahead, we expect continued strong demand for flavors and proteins and improving demand for our animal nutrition products as restrictions ease to drive second quarter results that will be significantly higher than the prior year quarter, supporting the 15% per annum trend growth rate for the calendar year.
Results for the quarter were affected by about $75 million in negative timing related to ocean freight positions.
The Ag Services and Oilseeds team delivered an outstanding quarter with operating profit of $777 million, representing a record for a first quarter.
The Nutrition team delivered 5% revenue growth on a constant currency basis and solid year-over-year operating profit growth.
It includes our work with growers to implement responsible farming practices, including the 13 million acres we've enrolled in sustainable farming programs globally in recent years.
As part of this ambitious plan, we aim to achieve full traceability throughout our direct and indirect South American soy supply chains by 2022 and have deforestation-free supply chains around the world by 2030.
As we move through the winter and into spring, we saw industry inventories falling almost 10% during the quarter, ending almost 20% lower year-over-year on March 31.
And we are seeing a strong demand for beverages, alternative proteins and nutritional supplements, including expected sales growth of 12% for plant protein ingredients this year.
We launched new initiatives like our $1 billion challenge with prioritized operational excellence, and we focused on returns as our primary financial metric.
It encompasses our Strive 35 goals to reduce the environmental impact of our processing operations, exemplified by the recent announcement of our partnership to help advance the proposed revolutionary zero emission power facility, utilizing our carbon capture and storage facility adjacent to our operations in Decatur, Illinois.
Our trailing fourth quarter average adjusted ROIC was 9%, 375 basis points higher than our 2021 annual WACC and significantly higher than the 7.6% in the year ago period.
Since then, we made impressive progress, including achieving 99% traceability to mill in our farms around supply chain and full traceability to farm for direct suppliers in 25 key municipalities in the Brazilian Cerrado.
We still anticipate our calendar year effective tax rate to be in the range of 14% to 16%.