We expect economic earnings per share to be in the range of $15.50 to $17, reflecting an adjusted EBITDA range of 875 million to $940 million.
Adjusted EBITDA of $255 million grew 27% year over year, driven by strength in both management and performance fees, and economic earnings per share of $4.22 benefited from an enhanced level of share repurchase activity.
We expect adjusted EBITDA to be in the range of 240 to 250 million based on current AUM levels, reflecting our market blend, which was up 2.5% as of Friday.
AMG delivered strong earnings growth despite net client cash outflows of $15.8 billion that were driven by certain quantitative strategies and seasonal client redemptions.
Since the second quarter of 2020, the earnings power of our business has increased considerably driven by the strong and improving performance from the large majority of our affiliates, combined with the impact of strategic investments and actions we have taken to reposition our business over the past 18 months.
Economic earnings per share of $4.22 and further benefited from an elevated level of share repurchase activity, which I'll expand on in a moment.
These collective actions contributed to year-over-year growth in EBITDA of 27% in the fourth quarter, driven by growth in management fees and performance fees, as well as operational efficiency.
Our estimate includes a performance fee range of 35 to 45 million, reflecting normal seasonality and strong performance at our liquid alternative managers.
In the first quarter, we expect to repurchase approximately 200 million of shares, which is elevated by 100 million as a function of our strong year-end cash position and first-quarter performance fee expectations.
For modeling purposes, we expect our GAAP and cash tax rates to be approximately 25 and 19%, respectively, for the first quarter.
We reported net outflows of $2.3 billion in global equities and $1.1 billion in U.S. equities, partly due to the impact of retail seasonality.
Our effective GAAP and cash tax rates were 24 and 25% for the fourth quarter.
For the fourth quarter, adjusted EBITDA of $255 million grew 27% year over year, driven by strong investment performance, higher markets, lower corporate expenses and the impact of growth investments in both existing and new affiliates, including affiliate equity purchases.
Intangible-related deferred taxes were negative 3 million in the fourth quarter, and we expect intangible related deferred taxes to be 9 million in the first quarter.
Our adjusted weighted average share count for the fourth quarter was 45.3 million, and we expect share count to be approximately 43 million for the first quarter.
In the first quarter, we expect this line item to be approximately 40 million.