As noted in our earnings material, FX translation was a favorable impact of approximately $0.02 per share in Q3 and $0.24 per share year-to-date.
We translated strong adjusted operating income growth into adjusted earnings per share growth of 14% in Q3 and 16% year-to-date.
As I further reflect on our performance year-to-date, as Greg noted, organic revenue growth was 12% in the third quarter and 9% year-to-date, our strongest organic revenue growth in over a decade.
Notably, our strongest growth in over a decade for two quarters in a row, driven by mid-single-digit or greater organic revenue growth from every solution line, highlighted by particular strength in health and commercial risk at 16% and 30%, respectively and adjusted earnings per share growth of 14%.
In Q3, this repatterning negatively impacted margins by approximately 240 basis points, resulting in Q3 operating margin contraction of 30 basis points.
Excluding this impact, margins would have expanded by 210 basis points in Q3 and 240 basis points year-to-date.
Focusing on financial performance in Q3, our global team delivered outstanding results across each of our key financial metrics, including 12% organic revenue growth.
Collectively, the headwind from expansionary patterning and tailwind from slower investment as compared to revenue growth were the main factors driving 30 basis points of margin contraction in Q3 and 20 basis points of margin expansion year-to-date.
In Q3, we issued $1 billion of senior notes as we return closer to historical leverage ratios, while maintaining our current investment-grade credit ratings.
Interest expense in the fourth quarter is expected to be approximately $85 million, reflecting our increased debt levels.
I would also note that total reported revenue was up 13% in Q3 and 12% year-to-date, including the favorable impact from changes in FX rates driven by a weaker U.S. dollar versus most currencies.
Free cash flow decreased 40% year-to-date to $1.1 billion as strong revenue growth was offset by the $1 billion termination fee payment and other related costs.
As we've described, the timing of expenses is changing year-over-year, such that $65 million of expenses moved into Q3 from Q4.
Many examples highlight our talent focus and priority, including our commitment on our entrepreneurship programs and a $30 million investment to create 10,000 new roles in the apprenticeship community.
Our investment in talent development has over 14,000 Aon colleagues around the world have participated in training programs in the last nine months alone, and the announcement of the Ann United growth ownership plan.
Of the total $1.363 billion of termination fee and other related costs, a pre-tax amount, the $1 billion termination fee was paid in Q3 and approximately 2/3 of the remaining charges will be paid in 2021, with the majority of the balance paid in 2022.