Our distributable earnings for the quarter were $49 million and $0.35 per share, and GAAP net income available to common stockholders was $57 million or $0.38 per diluted share.
GAAP book value per share prior to depreciation and the General CECL Reserve increased slightly to $15.54 from $15.48 at the end of last quarter.
As a result, ARI's construction exposure continues to decline, representing approximately only 14% of the portfolio at quarter-end.
The loan portfolio at quarter-end was $7.3 billion, a slight decline from the end of previous quarter due to increased loan repayments.
In the past year ARI, expanded the company's Board of Directors from 8 to 10 members, with the addition of Pamela Carlton and Carmencita Whonder.
Our debt-to-equity ratio at quarter-end decreased slightly to 2.2 times and we ended the quarter with $1.7 billion of unencumbered loan assets.
We expect ARI loan origination totals for 2021 will approach pre-pandemic levels as we have already committed to an additional $340 million of transactions in the fourth quarter and we are working through a number of other transactions that should close by year-end.
In the current highly competitive environment, the strength of the Apollo Commercial Real Estate Debt platform again has proven to be incredibly beneficial as we have completed approximately $1.5 billion of new transactions for ARI through the first three quarters of the year.
We increased our secure facility with J.P. Morgan to $1.5 billion and extended the maturity to September of 2024.
We ended the quarter with almost $600 million of total liquidity, which was a combination of cash and capacity on our lines.
Through September 30, we have received almost $800 million of loan repayments and an additional $277 million of loans have repaid since quarter-end.
Approximately 89% of our floating rate U.S. loans have LIBOR floors that are in the money today, with a weighted average floor 1.20%.
The portfolio had a weighted average unlevered yield of 5.2% and the remaining fully extended term of just under three years.
As a result of our success in Europe, loans securing properties in Europe represent approximately 40% of ARI's portfolio at quarter-end.
We also made $113 million of add-on fundings for previously closed loans.
During the quarter, we made a $180 million first mortgage, $141 million of which was funded.