These exceptional results have significantly enhanced our free cash flow and strengthen our balance sheet with our leverage declining to 2.5 times at the end of the third quarter.
As a result of our strong financial position and our prospects for continued growth our Board of Directors has authorized a share repurchase program of $300 million allowing us to return a portion of our robust free cash flow to our shareholders.
Total EBITDAR over the last 12 months surpasses $1.2 billion and leverage at the end of the third quarter was 2.75 times and expected to further decline by year-end.
In Downtown, Las Vegas, we posted record third quarter EBITDAR of $13.2 million on margins of 31%.
To reflect our confidence in the company's future our Board authorized a $300 million share repurchase program.
For the second straight quarter revenues exceeded both 2019 and 2020 levels setting a new third quarter record, strong flow through resulted in an adjusted EBITDAR of more than $340 million, also a third quarter record.
As a result of our strong operational performance, we are now generating robust levels of free cash flow, approaching $700 million over the past 12 months.
Sports betting operations in 15 states by year-end FanDuel is a clear leader in the expansion of digital gaming, and we are participating in its success as an equity owner and a partner.
In our Las Vegas Locals segment revenues grew 35% over last year and EBITDAR was up almost 60%, operating margins exceeded 54% and have been at or above the 50% mark every quarter of this year.
Our third quarter margin grew nearly 400 basis points over last year's record, and is up more than 1,400 basis points from 2019.
And in our Midwest and South segment, we set new third quarter records for both revenues and EBITDAR, as EBITDAR grew 22% over prior year and 42% from 2019.
Our quarterly EBITDAR was 42% higher than the third quarter of 2020 and 60% higher than the third quarter of 2019, and our companywide operating margins exceeded 40% for the second straight quarter.
In all, we expect our digital operations including sports, casino, and social casino will generate more than $20 million in EBITDAR this calendar year.
This amount is an addition to $61 million remaining from a prior approval.
We also continue to benefit as a 5% equity partner in FanDuel's accelerating expansion across the country and their position, as one of the leading online sports and casino operators in the country.
Companywide EBITDAR has exceeded the $1 billion mark in just nine months with margin, significantly higher than pre-closure levels.