We believe that consumer demand, coupled with additional pricing and cost-saving actions, will enable us to deliver adjusted diluted earnings per share of about $2.50.
We're updating our gross inflation guidance to about 11%, and we are reaffirming our adjusted earnings per share guidance of approximately $2.50.
We paid our first dividend at the increased quarterly rate of $0.3125 per share or $1.25 per share on an annualized basis shortly after the conclusion of Q1.
We now expect organic net sales growth of approximately 1% compared to our prior expectations of approximately flat growth.
Organic net sales declined by 0.4%, compared to a year ago and increased 7% on a two-year CAGR.
We remain confident in our original adjusted earnings per share guidance of approximately $2.50 for the year, but the path to achieve that guidance has changed.
As you can see, on a two-year CAGR basis, organic net sales for the first quarter increased 7% and adjusted earnings per share grew by nearly 8%.
As you can see on Slide 15, our total company retail sales on a two-year CAGR basis were up nearly 7% in the first quarter with strong growth across our frozen, snacks and staples domains.
We're increasing our organic net sales guidance to be approximately plus 1%, up from approximately flat at the time of our Q4 call.
We are reaffirming our adjusted operating margin guidance to remain at approximately 16%.
On an organic net-sales basis, the 0.4% decrease during the quarter was driven by a 2% decline in volume from lapping last year's elevated demand.
As you can see on Slide 26, our Q1 adjusted earnings per share of $0.50 was heavily impacted by inflation, as well as by a slightly higher tax rate.
As you can see on Slide 14, we currently expect gross inflation to be approximately 11% for fiscal 2022, compared to the approximately 9% we anticipated at the time of our fourth-quarter call.
We now expect gross cost of goods sold inflation to be approximately 11% for fiscal '22.
Total Conagra weighted dollar share grew 0.8 points on a two-year basis in the quarter with share gains in each of our domestic retail domains: frozen, snacks and staples.
We previously expected gross inflation of approximately 9%.