Finally, our core income for the third quarter was $193 million or $0.71 per share.
Net income was $213 million or $0.79 per share.
You will see on Slide 15 that we're not assuming the tenure will get back to the 2% level until 2027, a significant change compared to our prior-year expectations.
Exposure continued to be a headwind to our growth as it was down 3 points compared to the third quarter last year.
First, we have lowered our expectation for the normative 10-year treasury yield to 2.75%, a reduction of 100 basis points from last year.
In terms of growth, gross written premium, ex-captives, grew 9%, while net written premium growth was 7%, both higher than the second quarter.
Shareholders' equity, excluding accumulated other comprehensive income, was $11.6 billion or $42.78 per share.
The expense ratio has improved by 1.3 points compared to third quarter 2019, due to both growth in net earned premium and lower expenses.
New business growth was down 3% versus prior quarter and up 8% on a year-to-date basis.
And we are pleased to announce our regular quarterly dividend of $0.37 per share.
Turning to the dynamics of this hard market and starting with pricing, rate increases continued to accelerate as we achieved plus 12% in P&C overall, up 1 point from the second quarter.
Importantly, excluding workers' comp, which had slightly negative rate and our very profitable Affinity Programs, which had a small positive rate increase, the rate change was plus 17%, up 2 points from Q2 and 5 points from Q1.
As a result, our previously established COVID-19 ultimate loss estimate of $195 million remains appropriate for all events that occurred through the third quarter, from which we believe claims will eventually emerge and our loss estimate is still virtually all in IBNR.
The underlying combined ratio for Specialty was 90.5% this quarter, 1.6 points of improvement compared to third quarter 2019.
New business volume was strong with growth of 14% over the prior year's quarter.
Retention declined 1 point from the second quarter to 82%, due to our reunderwriting efforts in our London operations, which will essentially be completed in the fourth quarter and to our targeted actions in the US to improve the profitability of certain lines within healthcare and manufacturing that I have spoken about previously.