First-quarter gross profit includes a foreign currency headwind of approximately $4 million versus the prior-year period.
Net working capital as a percentage of trailing 12-month revenue declined steadily over the last seven quarters, down to 13.3% in the first quarter of 2020, down from 19.1% a year ago, due primarily to more efficient management of inventory and accounts payable.
On Slide 11, Americas Banking revenue of $345 million reflects a 3% decline, primarily due to our constant decision to exit lower margin service contracts.
As displayed on Slide 9, stronger gross margin, coupled with reductions to operating expense, boosted our operating profit by $36 million or 133% year over year to $63 million.
First-quarter revenue of $311 million was in line with our pre-COVID expectations.
And while COVID-19 pandemic has mildly influenced select work streams, we are continuing to pursue our gross savings target of $130 million for the year.
First-quarter revenue of $911 million was in line with our pre COVID 19 expectation and reflects the actions we are taking to drive higher quality revenue.
When compared with the prior year, we reduced our non-GAAP operating expenses by $29 million, a decline of 13%.
For these reasons, we expect a mild impact to our software revenue, which accounted for about 11% of total company revenue in 2019.
With respect to foreign currency, we experienced headwinds of $23 million in the quarter as the U.S. dollar strengthened primarily against the euro and Brazilian real.
Approximately $13 million of the revenue decline was due to our divestiture activity, while $8 million was due to our delivered actions taken in 2019 to reduce low-margin business.
Starting with our services business, which generated about 51% of total revenue in 2019, we expect a mild impact as the vast majority of our services revenues are recurring.
From an industry perspective, we expect our banking business, which generated approximately 74% of the company's revenue during 2019, will show greater resiliency in our retail business, due to the higher mix of services and software revenues.
We achieved this positive result despite the effects of COVID-19 and a foreign currency headwind of approximately $7 million in the quarter.
Transitioning to the right of this slide, you will see the combined efforts of higher-quality revenue and our DN Now initiatives, as non-GAAP gross profit increased $7 million year over year.
Non-GAAP gross profit of $90 million in the quarter and a gross margin of 28.9% reflects the resiliency of this segment as we benefit from our DN Now services modernization and software excellence initiatives, as well as our intentional actions to reduce low-margin business.