Looking ahead to 2022, we expect core FFO per share will be between $6.80 and $6.90, including the 1% dilution from Teraco, as well as 100 to 200 basis points of expected FX headwinds due to the strength of the dollar relative to 2021.
Renewal rates rolled down 4%, driven by a handful of large deals in North America as negative releasing spreads on greater than 1 megawatt renewals more than offset the positive releasing spreads on the sub-1 megawatt renewals.
In terms of earnings growth, fourth quarter core FFO per share was up 4% year over year and up 1% sequentially, driven by solid operational execution, cost controls and a reduction in financing costs due to proactive balance sheet management over the past 12 months.
We further strengthened connections with customers with $156 million of new bookings with record results in both a zero to 1 megawatt and greater than a megawatt category and ended the year with $500 million in new bookings, a 15% increase over the prior year.
The U.S. dollar strengthened during the fourth quarter relative to prior year exchange rates, and FX represented roughly a 130 basis point headwind to the year-over-year growth in our reported results from the top to the bottom line.
Same capital cash NOI growth was negative 6.6% in the fourth quarter, primarily driven by churn in North America, as well as higher property operating and net utilities expense.
In terms of operating performance, overall portfolio occupancy ticked down 60 basis points, almost entirely due to development deliveries placed in service during the quarter.
The current backlog of leases signed but not yet commenced rose from $330 million to $378 million as our fourth -- record fourth quarter signings more than offset commencements.
We expect to deliver revenue between $4.7 billion and $4.8 billion in 2022 and adjusted EBITDA of approximately $2.5 billion.
And finally, we continue to strengthen our balance sheet by raising equity capital through the establishment of Digital Core REIT in a highly successful IPO on the Singapore Stock Exchange and the related sale of a 90% interest in 10 fully utilized core data centers.
Turning to our economic risk mitigation strategies on Page 11.
As Bill noted, we delivered record bookings of $156 million with an $11 million contribution from interconnection during the fourth quarter.
Industry research firm Gartner recently updated their global IT spending forecast for 2022, projecting a 5.1% increase to $4.5 trillion, driven by companies investing in digital data growth strategies.
As a reminder, full year core FFO per share excludes the $20 million promote fee on the Prudential joint venture in the third quarter, as well as the $25 million PPA settlement in the first quarter.
For the full year, core FFO per share was up 5% year over year and came in $0.03 above the high end of our initial guidance range, which did not contemplate the contribution of $1.4 billion of assets through Digital Core REIT in early December.
Turning to our backlog on Page 9.