We delivered year-over-year sales growth of 34% with gains in every operating segment, business, and region.
All in, we expect a $25 million net tailwind versus the prior quarter from turnarounds for this segment.
While volume declined 4% year over year due to supply constraints from several factors, including our own maintenance, lingering effects of weather-related outages, and global logistics challenges, we continued to see robust underlying demand across our end markets, particularly for higher-margin downstream and sustainability-led applications.
Sequentially, operating EBIT was down $512 million, and operating EBIT margins declined by 520 basis points on lower olefin and co-product pricing, combined with higher raw material costs and energy costs.
We continue to advance a circular economy for plastics and see a consistent trend across our brand owner customer base toward redesigning packages to be recyclable and incorporating 30% post-consumer recycled content in their packaging by 2030.
For cash flow, we anticipate higher joint venture dividends from increased earnings in 2021 and a $1 billion tailwind toward pension-related items following our actions last year.
Total turnaround spending for the year will be up approximately $100 million versus 2021 as we have another heavy turnaround year with three crackers slated for maintenance activity and increased inflationary pressure on materials and labor.
We achieved $7.1 billion of cash flow from operations, bringing our total cash flow from operations since spin to $18 billion.
In the packaging and specialty plastics segment, operating EBIT was $1.4 billion, up $662 million year over year, primarily due to margin improvement and partly offset by lower-supply volumes.
Moving to the industrial intermediates and infrastructure segment, operating EBIT was 595 million, up 299 million year over year, primarily due to continued price strength.
These results translated into significant cash generation for the quarter, with cash flow from operations of $2.6 billion, up $901 million year over year, and cash flow conversion of 88%.
Prices were up 39% year over year, reflecting gains in all operating segments, businesses, and regions.
And we returned $912 million to shareholders in the quarter, including $512 million through our industry-leading dividend and $400 million in share repurchases.
Altogether, we anticipate an approximately $200 million impact versus the prior quarter for this segment.
Sequentially, operating EBID improved $11 million as price gains were partly offset by our planned maintenance turnaround activity.
We delivered operating EBIT growth of $1.2 billion year over year with margin expansion in every operating segment.