These sales translated into solid earnings per share with fourth-quarter adjusted earnings of $1.68.
For the fourth quarter, Brinker reported total revenues of $1.009 billion, with a consolidated comp sales of 65%.
In keeping with our ongoing strategy, the majority of these sales were driven by traffic, up 53% for the quarter, a 10% beat versus the industry on a two-year basis.
This increase negatively impacted fourth-quarter earnings per share approximately $0.06.
This incremental investment impacted quarterly earnings per share by approximately $0.06 and increased labor expense margin by roughly 40 basis points, well worth the benefits it will accrue.
Capex of $155 million to $165 million, an annual effective tax rate of 14% to 15%, and weighted annual share count of 45 million to 47 million shares.
At the brand level, Chili's comparable restaurant sales were positive 8.5% versus the fourth quarter of fiscal-year '19, which we believe is the more appropriate comparison for the quarter.
Our board of directors has also reinstated the share repurchase authorization that was suspended in the early days of the pandemic with an authorization amount of $300 million.
Labor expense for the quarter, again, as a percent of company sales was favorable 240 basis points versus prior year, primarily driven by the extra week sales leverage versus fixed labor expenses and the slower reopening pace in a couple of high wage states such as California.
Additionally, on an absolute dollar basis, the fourth quarter was Chili's largest sales quarter on record, topping $900 million in total revenue.
To reward our operator's strong performance throughout the fiscal year, we also chose to further invest in our hourly team members and managers through a variety of incremental bonus structures, totaling approximately $4 million for the quarter beyond our normal payout formulas.
Maggiano's, while down 18% compared to fourth quarter of fiscal '19, made very solid progress with its recovery curve and built positive momentum to carry into the current fiscal year.
Our fourth-quarter restaurant operating margin was 16.9%.
It's in more than 250 restaurants now, and we anticipate full implementation by November.
And along with the support of our franchise partners, It's Just Wings became more than $170 million business in the U.S., with many of our international franchisees also now operating the brand.
In a year of closures and shutdowns, we opened our first virtual brand in over 1,000 restaurants by leveraging our technological infrastructure, It's Just Wings surpassed our $150 million target in our company-owned restaurants.