As for our FY2022 guidance, we are raising our full-year adjusted earnings per share range to $20.50 to $21.50 to reflect second quarter results and outlook for the second half of the fiscal year as well as the expected benefit from our ASR transaction.
While adjusted earnings per share was unchanged year-over-year, this year's effective tax rate was significantly higher as last year's earnings included a $0.71 per share discrete tax benefit from favorable guidance issued by the IRS.
Ground operating income was down approximately $70 million and in addition to the $90 million I mentioned earlier, results were significantly affected by higher wage and purchase transportation rates and network inefficiencies amid the constrained labor market.
We delivered strong results for the quarter with an 11% increase in adjusted operating income, which exceeded our initial expectations shared during the Q1 call.
Ground reported $8.3 billion in revenue, a 13% increase year-over-year, with operating margin at 5.8%.
Our capital forecast for fiscal 2022 remains at $7.2 billion and less than 8% of anticipated revenue.
FedEx Freight also delivered a strong quarter with an operating margin of 14.7%.
Given the historically challenging nature of peak season, along with the continued staffing challenges felt by numerous companies around the world, we are quite pleased with our second quarter consolidated financial results, with adjusted operating income up 11% year-over-year.
As we anticipated, most of the headwinds we experienced in the first quarter persisted through the second quarter, which dampened our Q2 profitability by an estimated $770 million.
We are forecasting that the U.S. domestic parcel market will reach 134 million pieces a day by calendar year 2026, a remarkable 70% growth from 2020.
Second quarter results include outstanding performance by our team at FedEx Express, where operating income on an as-adjusted basis exceeded $1 billion for the quarter.
Express adjusted operating income increased to over $1 billion and reported an adjusted operating margin of 8.8%, which was driven by higher yields and international priority volume growth, which more than offset the negative effects of continued staffing challenges and COVID-19-related air network inefficiencies.
Q2 delivered our second consecutive quarter of 14% revenue growth, demonstrating the strong demand for our differentiated portfolio and our ability to drive revenue quality as a result.
I'm pleased to announce we will be hosting an Investor Meeting on Tuesday and Wednesday, 28, 29 June 2022 in Memphis.
Q2 Express international export yield grew 12% and volume grew 7.6%, which is outstanding year-over-year growth.
We estimate the effect of labor shortages on our Q2 results was approximately $470 million, in line with our original expectations.