Adjusted earnings per share were $1.06, up 21% versus the same period last year as strong volume growth, lower SG&A and lower interest expense associated with our debt reduction actions drove higher earnings per share than last year.
Last evening, we reported strong fourth quarter results with organic revenue up 5%, EBITDA up 9% and earnings per share up 21%.
Year-on-year adjusted gross profit margin was 27.5%, down 10 basis points versus last year as higher volume was offset by higher variable compensation and unfavorable absorption due to a reduction in inventory.
Adjusting for currency, organic revenue was up 4.7% with volume up 5% and pricing having a negative 0.3% impact year-on-year in the quarter.
Adjusted EBITDA for the quarter of $123 million was up 9.4% versus last year and above the high end of our planning assumptions, reflecting strong top line performance, particularly in Engineering Adhesives.
Construction Adhesives' EBITDA margin was solid at 12.4%, down 80 basis points versus last year, reflecting unfavorable mix and an increase in variable compensation accruals as a result of the stronger top line results in the fourth quarter.
Capital expenditures are expected to be approximately $95 million in the 2021 fiscal year, and we expect to devote approximately $200 million of our cash flow after capex investments and dividends to the repayment of debt.
We also realized significant operational benefits from the business realignment completed earlier in the year, which generated $30 million of annualized SG&A savings in 2020, including $10 million realized in the fourth quarter, resulting in strong profit growth and operating leverage.
We expect our 2021 core tax rate to be between 26% and 28% compared to our 2020 core tax rate of about 25%.
Based on what we know today, and the planning assumptions that Jim laid out earlier, we anticipate full year organic revenue growth to be in the low to mid-single-digits, and EBITDA to increase by approximately 10% as volume leverage, pricing, manufacturing and supply chain savings and carryover of the restructuring-related savings and SG&A offset higher raw material costs, variable compensation rebuild and higher travel expense.
For the quarter, revenue was up 5.2% versus the same period last year.
Cash flow from operations increased 27% year-over-year, and enabled us to pay down a total of $205 million of debt for the year, above our original $200 million target.
Our customer wins continue to grow, and we are still in the process of implementing changes and optimizing the business with a focus now on driving $20 million to $30 million of efficiencies across our manufacturing network by the end of 2022.
Engineering Adhesives' EBITDA margin remained strong at nearly 17%, down 80 basis points versus last year, reflecting an increase in variable compensation as a result of the stronger top line results in the fourth quarter.
Sales growth, improving margins and continued working capital efficiency will enable us to continue to drive strong cash flow and deliver another year of strong debt paydown with a target of paying down another $200 million of debt in 2021.
Revenues increased and margins improved sequentially throughout the year, and in the fourth quarter, we delivered 5% organic revenue growth with positive organic growth in each of our segments.