Enact reported very strong results with adjusted operating income of 135 million compared with 126 million in the prior quarter and an adjusted operating loss of 3 million in the prior-year period.
We reported adjusted operating income of 71 million in the quarter, which compared to adjusted operating income of 62 million in the prior quarter and an adjusted operating loss of 5 million in the prior year.
Relative to the prior quarter, Enact reported higher new insurance written, lower earned premiums and a 32% decrease in new delinquencies.
For the second quarter, Enact reported adjusted operating income of 135 million and a loss ratio of 12% compared to adjusted operating income of 126 million and a loss ratio of 22% in the prior quarter.
New delinquencies of approximately 7,000 during the quarter were down 30% sequentially with 45% reported in new forbearance plants.
In fixed annuities, adjusted operating earnings of 13 million for the quarter was lower compared to the prior quarter and prior year, primarily from lower mortality and single premium immediate annuities and unfavorable impact from the decline in interest rates during the quarter.
In long-term care, adjusted operating income was 98 million in the second quarter compared to 95 million in the prior quarter and 48 million in the prior year.
One, reduce our holding company debt to approximately 1 billion.
Results were primarily driven by LTC insurance, which reported adjusted operating income of 98 million, reflecting higher earnings from in-force rate actions, including benefit reductions related to a legal settlement and higher net investment income versus both the prior quarter and the prior year.
U.S. life insurance reported adjusted operating income of 71 million for the quarter compared with 62 million in the prior quarter and an adjusted operating loss of 5 million in the prior year.
New insurance written in Enact was 26.7 billion in the quarter, up 7% versus the prior quarter, driven primarily by a larger purchase origination market and down 6% versus the prior year, primarily driven by lower estimated market share.
As of the second quarter, the pre-tax balance of this reserve was 957 million, up from 625 million as of year-end 2020.
Additionally, we released 4 million of IBNR reserves related to June delinquencies that have not yet been reported by services to us and which we expect will be lower than had been assumed in our prior IBNR reserves.
Included in net income for the quarter was 46 million in non-operating items, mostly consisting of mark-to-market increases on limited partnerships in our investment portfolio.
Once our parent debt level reaches approximately 1 billion, we'll be in a better position to return capital to shareholders and make prudent investments in future growth.
Results reflected a loss ratio of 12%, which compares favorably to the prior quarter due to lower losses from new delinquencies and higher reserve strengthening in the prior quarter.