Additionally, we expect another year of strong earnings growth, with adjusted earnings per share in the range of $3.22 to $3.32, which represents year-over-year growth of 22% to 25%.
We exited the year with service revenues up 8% in the fourth quarter with high single-digit growth in all three regions in nearly all business domains.
Although we expect to remain price/cost positive on an earnings per share basis, the inflated level of pricing will result in margin headwinds of approximately 40 basis points for the year.
Corporate was a $0.03 headwind year-over-year and other items netted to a $0.06 tailwind, primarily related to lower share count, lower net financing charges and FX.
EPS of $0.88 was at the high end of our guidance range and increased 16% year-over-year, benefiting from higher profitability as well as lower share count.
With an estimated $195 billion in government stimulus earmarked for K-12 spending, this provides a significant opportunity.
Underlying margins are expanding to 110 to 120 basis points.
On a full year basis, we expect high single-digit organic revenue growth, with 70 to 80 basis points of segment EBITA margin expansion.
For the full year, service revenue grew 4%, which is up two to three points over 2019 levels, despite a slow start to the year as we manage through lingering site access restrictions and abnormal customer budget pressures.
As you can see, Q1 typically represents less than 15% of our full year earnings per share given our normal seasonality.
As planned, we launched over 150 new products in fiscal 2021, spanning nearly all business units, resulting in continued share gains in both Q4 and the full year.
Over the last 18 months, we have strengthened our market-leading capabilities to best position ourselves for the shifting industry demographics and evolving digital technologies that are enabling outcome-based solution models.
Service orders were up 7% in Q4 and, importantly, up low single digits organically versus 2019 levels.
For Q1 of fiscal '22, we expect to be above that level, with Q1 guidance representing about 16% of our full year at the midpoint.
Segment EBITA increased 10% versus the prior year, margin expanding 30 basis points to 15.9%.
North America revenue grew 4% organically, led by strength in services, which was higher in all domain.