Our non-GAAP earnings per share of $1.38 is down from $1.41 in Q1 last year, due primarily to the additional shares issued in the Combination, partially offset by the inclusion of Houghton and Norman Hay.
On a pro forma basis, as if Houghton was also in Q1 of 2019, net sales were down 3%, which reflects negative impacts from lower volumes and foreign exchange, partially offset by additional sales from Norman Hay.
In non-operating items, we reported a non-cash charge of $22.7 million for final settlement and termination of legacy Quaker's U.S. defined benefit pension plan, a process we previously disclosed.
Despite the challenges we faced in Q1, the Company generated good cash flow and adjusted EBITDA, which was up 10% on a pro forma basis and non-GAAP earnings per share of $1.38 was well above consensus of $1.
So, while our actual sales are up significantly to $378.6 million in Q1, this is due to the inclusion of Houghton and Norman Hay.
Sequentially, non-GAAP earnings per share is up from $1.34 in Q4 of 2019, which included Houghton and Norman Hay and the additional shares.
In the table on Slide 8, you can see a reported operating loss of $12.4 million in the GAAP section but in non-GAAP operating income of $36 million in the middle section.
Overall, we estimate that COVID-19 impacted our sales by about 4% in the first quarter.
For example, our April revenues were down in the order of 30%.
Our first quarter pro forma adjusted EBITDA grew 10% versus last year due to our integration savings, the impact of the Norman Hay acquisition last quarter, and the additional cost control measures we put in place to combat the global effect of COVID-19 on our volumes.
So please see Slides 6 and 7 and also the chart on Slide 8, while I review some highlights.
For 2020, our new estimate is $53 million of cost synergies achieved versus our previous estimate of $35 million.
For the full year, we expect our adjusted EBITDA to be more than $200 million.
Concerning gross margins, you may recall from our comments in the past that the combined gross margins of Quaker Houghton were expected to be about 1% lower than stand-alone Quaker.
Concurrent with this termination, the Company paid approximately $1.8 million, subject to final adjustment.
Adjusting for all one-time charges and benefits, we estimate our ETR would have been 22% this Q1 and 24% in Q1 last year.