We now forecast consolidated adjusted EBITDA of $4.30 to $4.6 billion, and distributable cash flow of $1.60 to $1.9 billion for the full year 2021.
For the first quarter, we generated approximately $1.5 billion of consolidated adjusted EBITDA, approximately $750 million of distributable cash flow and almost $400 million in net income on revenue of approximately $3.1 billion.
April TTF settled higher than JKM at $6.46 an MMBtu that was 13% higher on the month and up almost 200% year-on-year.
Early reports of total gas demand in China show an increase of approximately 15% year-on-year in Q1.
During the first quarter, we exported a quarterly record of 133 cargoes of LNG from our two facilities, with production incentivized by strong global LNG margins during the quarter, and we had the benefit of Corpus Christi Train three commissioning volumes.
Significant drawdowns from storage through winter and into April has left European storage approximately 34 bcm or around 50% lower than the prior year by the end of April and approximately 11 bcm or approximately 375 Bcf below the five year average.
Extreme cold weather in Asia and then Europe during the first quarter, combined with the supply constraints and a tight shipping market, caused unprecedented price spikes in JKM in the early part of the quarter to all-time highs of over $30 in January.
For the first quarter, we generated net income of $393 million, consolidated adjusted EBITDA of approximately $1.5 billion and distributable cash flow of approximately $750 million.
The impact of shifts in these curves on the fair value of our commodity and FX derivatives, during first quarter 2021 was a net loss of approximately $120 million, which was substantially all noncash.
However, price levels are still well above where they were a year ago with March JKM settling at $8.26 and June trading above $9 currently.
The in the first quarter, global LNG supply showed positive year-on-year growth for the first time since the first quarter of 2020, but net growth was modest as a healthy 17% growth in U.S. exports was largely offset by declines at several LNG facilities around the globe, which were either shut down or underperforming, including facilities in Norway, Nigeria, Australia, Trindad, Tobago and Russia.
In the subsequent four year period, that average is expected to drop to approximately 11 million tons a year, a significant slowdown in supply growth, which will be amplified by output declines from older legacy projects.
Data from Wood Mackenzie suggest that the region could lose more than 20 Bcf a day of domestic output by 2040, and while current upstream developments are considered unlikely to offset more than just a small fraction of that decline.
As Jack mentioned, today, we are again increasing our guidance ranges for full year 2021 consolidated adjusted EBITDA and distributable cash flow by $200 million, bringing total increases to $400 million above the original ranges we provided in November of last year.
We forecast that global LNG trade will approximately double, expanding by approximately 350 million tons per annum to over 700 million tonnes per annum by 2040, which would support additional, approximately 225 million tons per annum of incremental global supply.
Our revised guidance ranges are $4.30 to $4.6 billion in consolidated adjusted EBITDA and $1.6 to $1.9 billion in distributable cash flow.