During the third quarter of 2020, we recognized a non-cash impairment of $582 million that reflected our expectation for reduced profitability from our Houston refinery.
In the third quarter, our company delivered $5.25 per share of earnings, more than 4 times higher than the same quarter last year.
We are confident that we can complete our deleveraging and achieve our target of reducing debt by $4 billion before the end of this year.
Robust demand drove EBITDA to about $1.6 billion, slightly lower than the second quarter.
Strong cash flows supported debt reduction of nearly $700 million, bringing our year-to-date debt reduction to $2.4 billion.
While our portfolio delivered $2.7 billion of EBITDA, this quarter's results reflect a sequential decline of 11%.
Results were impacted by approximately $25 million due to site closure costs associated with the exit of our ethanol business.
Our year-to-date total recordable incident rate for employees and contractors rose to 0.24 during the third quarter.
We closed the third quarter with cash and liquid investments of $1.9 billion.
EBITDA was approximately $2.7 billion, a year-over-year quarterly improvement of $1.8 billion.
Third quarter propylene oxide and derivatives results decreased about $15 million as margins declined slightly from the historical highs of the second quarter.
Customer supply chain constraints continue to hinge results with third quarter EBITDA of $121 million, $8 million lower than the second quarter.
Rising feedstock and energy costs drove margin declines in most businesses resulted in third quarter EBITDA of $348 million, $248 million lower than the prior quarter.
Efficient cash conversion generated $2.1 billion in cash from operating activities, a new quarterly record for our company.
Higher feedstock cost and lower seasonal demand during summer holidays reduced margins and volumes in our EAI markets resulting in a third quarter EBITDA of $474 million, $234 million lower than the second quarter.
During the fourth quarter, we expect that robust cash generation and an anticipated tax refund will enable continued progress on our goal to reduce debt by up to $4 billion during 2021, and further strengthen our investment-grade balance sheet.