GAAP diluted earnings per share was $0.54 for the fiscal 2022 first quarter versus $0.10 in the prior quarter.
Non-GAAP diluted earnings per share was $0.55 in the current year quarter versus $0.18 in last year's first quarter.
We expect our effective tax rate for the full fiscal 2022 year to be between 25.5% and 26.5%.
Written same-store sales for the La-Z-Boy Furniture Galleries network increased 10% versus the prior year quarter, and has grown at a compounded annual growth rate of 13% across the last two years since pre-pandemic, demonstrating the continued strength of demand for our La-Z-Boy branded products.
Compared with the pre-pandemic fiscal '20 first quarter, sales increased 27% for a compounded annual growth rate of about 13%.
On a consolidated basis, fiscal '22 first quarter sales increased 84% to a record $525 million, reflecting strong demand, capacity increases, and a comparison to the fiscal '21 first quarter when we restarted our plants at reduced capacity after a month-long shutdown and most retailers were closed for a portion of the quarter due to COVID-19.
Sales for Joybird which was reported in corporate and other, increased 188% to $39 million, almost tripling from the prior year first quarter.
Across the La-Z-Boy enterprise, we delivered all-time record high sales of $525 million, making and selling more furniture in the quarter than we ever have in modern history, even with production running only 12 weeks in the quarter, due to our annual one week maintenance shutdown in July, versus 13 weeks in most quarters.
Finally, as we make investments in the business to strengthen the Company for the future, we expect capital expenditures to be in a range of $65 million to $75 million for fiscal 2022.
Additionally, the Board approved a dividend of $0.15 per share to shareholders of record as of September 2nd, 2021.
Consolidated GAAP operating margin was 6.5% and non-GAAP operating margin was 6.6% reflecting expected significant short-term pressure on wholesale margins as the realization of previously announced pricing actions trailed escalating input costs, and we continue to invest in capacity expansion.
Earlier this week, demonstrating its confidence in the Company's ability to grow profitably and continue to generate strong cash flow from operations, the Board of Directors approved an increase of 6.5 million shares to the Company's existing share repurchase authorization, with a 2.5 million shares available for repurchase under the program as of the end of the fiscal 2022 first quarter.
Turning to cash, we generated $6 million in cash from operating activities in the quarter.
Starting with our wholesale segment, delivered sales for the quarter grew 76% to $393 million compared with the prior year period, compared with the pre-pandemic fiscal '20 first quarter, sales were 23% higher for a compounded annual growth rate of 11%.
Over the past two quarters, we have returned $79 million to shareholders via share repurchase.
Written same-store sales for our Company-owned Retail segment increased 22% versus the prior year period, and at a compounded annual growth rate of 16% over the last two years.