Flat quarter on quarter, total oil production of 172,000 barrels per day was quite an accomplishment in light of the operational challenges we experienced and the impact to production you've seen reported by peer companies.
For $1 billion of capital spending, we now expect to generate $1.6 billion of free cash flow at $60 per barrel WTI, up from the prior guidance of around $1.5 billion.
As a result, we have dramatically enhanced the resilience of our company, driving our free cash flow breakevens consistently below $35 per barrel WTI and building on a multiyear trend of sustainable free cash flow and getting that cash back in the hands of our investors.
Financial outcomes that can compete with any sector in the S&P 500 and do so across a much broader and lower range of commodity prices.
We have significant tax attributes in the form of net operating losses, approximately $8.4 billion on a gross basis, in addition to foreign tax credits of over $600 million.
During first quarter, we generated over $440 million of free cash flow.
In fact, even with the recent dividend increase, our post-dividend free cash flow breakeven currently sits around $35 per barrel of WTI.
When considering our updated debt-reduction target on recent base dividend increase, we're actually on track to return well over 40% of our cash flow back to investors this year.
The proof point for this sustainability is our five-year benchmark maintenance scenario that can deliver around $5 billion of free cash flow from 2021 to 2025 and a flat $50 per barrel WTI price environment or closer to $7 billion of free cash flow at the current forward curve, along with a corporate free cash flow breakeven of less than $35 per barrel throughout the period.
First, we accelerated our 2021 gross debt-reduction objective of $500 million, fully retiring our next significant maturity and we're now targeting at least another $500 million of gross debt reduction, bringing our total 2021 debt-reduction target to $1 billion.
In summary, we are well-positioned this year to return over 40% of our cash flow to investors through gross debt reduction and our base dividend, our top near-term priorities.
And in parallel, our aim is to significantly reduce our gross debt moving toward a $4 billion gross debt level.
More specifically, our goal has been to reduce our net debt-to-EBITDA to below 1.5 times, assuming more of a mid-cycle $45 to $50 per barrel WTI environment.
My key message today is that we're on track to achieve all of our 2021 operational objectives that we set at the beginning of the year, including our $1 billion capital program, and that we are on track to exceed the free cash flow objectives.
As we make significant progress toward our $4 billion gross debt objective, we will likely take the balance of 2021 to accomplish.
With the increase in wells to sales and shifting capital from 1Q to 2Q, we expect 2Q capex to rise to the $300 million range, likely representing the peak capex quarter for the year.