When combined with MAV, we expect the over $460 million in capital provided by Oaktree can enable us to potentially increase our earnings per share by 65% or more once the proceeds are fully invested.
We're excited to announce that we've executed definitive agreements with Oaktree for $250 million in incremental capital through Holdco notes issued by Ocwen Financial Corporation.
The average margins fell to about 56 basis points versus our expectation of 77 basis points for Q4.
Annualized adjusted pre-tax profitability has improved over $380 million over the second-quarter 2018 baseline for Ocwen and PHH combined.
We estimate full deployment of the proceeds can generate roughly $5 per share in incremental earnings on a fully diluted basis.
The Oaktree notes have a face value of $285 million with a $35 million original issue discount for net proceeds of $250 million.
Adjusted pre-tax profitability was up roughly 15% in the fourth quarter over the third quarter despite declining origination margins.
We reported a GAAP net loss of $7 million, $2 million improvement over prior quarter and after the $13 million of additional CFPB accrual I previously mentioned.
This translates to over a 65% increase above our potential baseline earnings per share range which assumes an after-tax ROE range of roughly 10% to 15% on about $414 million of equity.
Our strategic alliance with Oaktree can provide almost $0.5 billion of incremental capital to enable a level of growth, earnings per share accretion, and potential value creation that we could just not achieve on a stand-alone basis.
The remaining $150 million in proceeds from the Holdco notes will be used to support our on book growth objectives through MSR purchases and funding a portion of the MAV investment.
Flow origination volume in the fourth quarter was up 49% over the third quarter and up over 7 times as compared to 2019.
We continue to target achieving at least a 30% recapture rate for our recapture platform and we believe our recapture performance is only limited by our operating capacity to address available opportunities.
In addition, Oaktree will receive warrants for 12% of the fully diluted shares of Ocwen.
In addition, in the fourth quarter, we were awarded multiple subservicing contracts with projected volume of $16 billion to $24 billion that we expect will board in the first and second quarter.
In 2021, looking ahead, the market, we expect the total originations will be down roughly about 17%, with much decline in the second half of the year.