We expect our Q4 revenue to be between $2.3 billion to $2.5 billion.
This resulted in a 73% sequential decline in Q3 acquisition contracts and a 41% sequential decline in closed acquisitions.
To that end, we are aligning around 2 core product offerings that we believe will drive our growth and profitability in this next chapter.
Before I discuss our Q3 financial results and Q4 guidance, it's important to level set that, based on our outlook for Q4, we expect to generate over $530 million in contribution profit for the full year or 3.5% contribution margin, which is just shy of our annual target margin range of 4% to 6%, notwithstanding the sharp housing market reset.
This includes our announced reduction of 550 employees or 18% of our workforce across all business functions.
And we will alongside accelerate the trajectory of our third-party product, leveraging our audience and capabilities built over the past 8 years.
We sold about 2,400 more homes in the midpoint of what we've guided to, ahead of the seasonally slow fourth quarter.
And we expect to be approximately 65% of the way through by year-end.
In addition, we ended the third quarter with $1.5 billion in unrestricted cash and securities and $1.5 billion of equity invested in our homes.
Together, these 2 products help deliver on our vision of enabling a seamless digital transaction, replacing the inefficiencies of a traditional listing process.
Total adjusted operating expenses are expected to be approximately $145 million for Q4.
For homes we made offers on in Q3, we expect those homes to perform within our contribution margin target of 4% to 6%.
Starting with our first-party product, we are focused on 4 key areas to navigate this market transition and more importantly, thrive as the market recovers.
We back this up with an appraisal match guarantee of up to $50,000, which provides peace of mind around pricing as the buyer pays the price if it's lower.
Today, 20% of our homes listed on our Exclusives platform are under contract within 2 weeks, demonstrating the strong momentum we're driving with our direct buyer base.
As of the end of Q3, we had sold through or were in resale contract on over 40% of the Q2 offer cohort.