We have included in our lease full year 2022 guidance of $3.52 per diluted share in OP units between $3.52 and $3.54, that is, which does not include any impact of pending transactions.
Offsetting those declines in expenses, we did incur noncash charges related to our land lease gross-ups and land rights amortization of about $2 million.
Our total revenue from income from real estate outperformed our third quarter of '21 by over $50 million.
And that relevance spans 2 fronts.
Shares were sold at an average net price of $50.97.
Our operating expenses decreased by $57 million, and that's really due to the gain on sale of our Trop Las Vegas building of $67.4 million, which is offset by the gain on Perryville last year of $14.8 million.
We achieved our escalators on our Pinnacle, our Boyd, our Belterra and PENN leases, which added another $3 million of cash rent for the quarter over prior quarter, and we had noncash revenue gross-ups investment in leases and straight-line rent adjustments of $10 million.
But in this case, we actually have done that with PENN National -- forgive me, PENN Entertainment, I've had 50 years, they call that place Penn National.
We also closed on the Bally's Quad Cities and Black Hawk properties in April of this year, which also increased our cash rental income for the quarter by $3 million.
transactions this year, which increased cash rental income by approximately $31 million.
With a pipeline of opportunity between the potential option for the Bally's Lincoln asset; the PENN developments, where we have the opportunity to fund; the landside development of Baton Rouge, where we've got a contractual 8.25% return; and other pipeline activity, we're looking forward to deploying our capacity smartly over coming periods.
In addition to our overnight issuance of the $350 million of equity related to the Bally's transaction, we also issued another $169 million of equity through the ATM program, $104 million normal way and the additional $65 million to the newly implemented forward that Desiree mentioned.
To derisk the execution around the debt for our Bally's transaction, our team successfully worked to put in place a delayed draw term loan with a 5-year term for $600 million, which is all incremental to our revolver, and economic terms consistent with the revolver.