Normalized funds from operations were $14.9 million or $0.23 per share, a decline of $15.4 million compared to the prior year quarter.
Regarding the common dividend, we expect to maintain the current quarterly distribution rate of $0.01 per share to preserve liquidity and allow for short-term flexibility until we improve ILPT's leverage profile.
Adjusted EBITDAre increased approximately 85% year-over-year at $76.1 million, primarily as a result of our acquisition of Monmouth.
Importantly, this refinancing extended our weighted average debt maturity to over 4 years and provides us time and flexibility to execute on our deleveraging plans.
As we have discussed on prior calls, our plan may include relaunching the marketing campaign of the 30 properties previously identified for dispositions, resuming discussions with potential partners for an equity interest in ILPT's Mountain Industrial joint venture or exploring additional joint venture opportunities with properties where fixed debt is already in place.
In September, we closed on a $1.2 billion debt package that enabled us to fully repay the bridge loan facility used for the Monmouth Real Estate Investment Corporation acquisition.
We spent $8.5 million on capital expenditures during the third quarter, including $5 million for development costs, $2.2 million of tenant improvements and leasing costs and $1.3 million of building improvements.
Occupancy at quarter end reached 99.2%, up 30 basis points on a sequential quarter basis.
As we are in a time of economic uncertainty, we are encouraged that 78% of our revenues come from investment grade tenants or subsidiaries or from our secure Hawaii land leases.
During the third quarter, we entered new and renewal leases for approximately 1.7 million square feet at weighted average rental rates that were nearly 77.5% higher than prior rental rates for the same space, reflecting record quarterly leasing spreads.
The major drivers impacting normalized FFO over the prior year quarter was higher interest expense, partially offset by a $38 million increase in NOI, primarily from the Mamba portfolio.
As of September 30, 2022, ILPT's consolidated portfolio included 413 warehouse and distribution properties in 39 states, totaling approximately 60 million square feet with a weighted average remaining lease term of approximately 9 years.
Total portfolio same-property cash basis NOI for the third quarter decreased 1.9% year-over-year.
Once executed, we expect these leases will yield average roll up in rent of 20% on the mainland and 40% in Hawaii, further illustrating the strength of our portfolio.
The impact of this activity is an increase of $4.8 million in annualized rental revenue, which showcases our ability to generate organic cash flow growth while maintaining portfolio stability.
Interest expense increased $80.7 million over the prior year quarter, including a $45.6 million increase in cash interest expense and a $35.5 million of noncash amortization of financing fees, of which $31.4 million was related to the bridge loan facility that we paid off at the end of the quarter.