Longer term, these 2 markets present growth opportunities as they continue to be under-housed and have the potential to show improvement very quickly with the infusion of more certainty of jobs.
This strength led us to adjust our same-store revenue guidance upward in July and to set our current expectations slightly above the midpoint or at 10.6% for the full year 2022 which is the best same-store revenue growth in our history.
For historical context, in a normal year, our forecasted embedded growth would be just above 1%.
Our loss to lease which refers to the revenue improvement we can expect from moving leases in place today to current market levels is significantly larger than historical years as evident on Page 7.
We expect this to be about 4.5% by year-end.
We couple that with a continuation of modest expense growth leading the same-store NOI growth for the quarter of an exceptional 16.2%.
With continuing positive financial leverage, this led to a 19.5% increase in quarter-over-quarter normalized funds from operations.
On the occupancy side, general demand trends, including improving retention, supports strong occupancy above 96% for the balance of 2022 and should carry through into 2023, unless there is a substantial loss of jobs in our target renter demographic.
This performance supports occupancy, which continues to be solid at 96.2% even as we enter the slower part of the leasing season.
Seattle and San Francisco are the 2 markets that stand out with more recent moderation than anticipated.
These new residents are paying us slightly less than 20% of their income and rent, which is generally consistent with prior rent-to-income levels.
Overall, we are well positioned to continue the trend of expanding our fully loaded net operating margin, which currently sits around 69% into 2023.
The lack of governmental rental assistance in '23 compared to the $31 million we will receive in 2022 will require continued improvement in resident behavior -- payment behaviors in order to return us closer to historical norms and contribute positively to revenue growth.
Our current loss to lease of approximately 5% will seasonally moderate through year-end, but certainly positions us for growth when leases mature and we capture this loss in '23.
The college graduate cohort, which we believe makes up the vast majority of our residents has an unemployment rate of 1.8% and compared to the 3.5% overall unemployment rate.
For historical context, our loss to lease would be about 50 basis points at the end of a typical non-recessionary year.