We demonstrated continued strong performance in the third quarter with distributable earnings of $0.49 per share, a 20% increase over last year.
We recorded distributable earnings per share of $0.49 in the third quarter, which is up 20% year-over-year.
We're pleased to affirm our prior guidance for annual growth in distributable earnings per share of 10% to 13% through 2024 and 5% to 8% annual growth in our dividend from the same period.
As the top left graph on Page 9 indicates, we have maintained strong margins and are now entering a phase during which we expect our cost of debt to increase.
However, even if we assume a high cost outcome of simply refinancing it with a similar bond offering at a rate 350 basis points to 400 basis points higher than its current coupon, we believe the size and profitability of our business by 2026 will be such that it will not cause our profitability to fall below our targeted ROE range.
And our Board has declared a quarterly dividend of $0.375 per share.
The primary conclusion of this chart is that in this illustrative scenario, we believe higher yields and higher debt costs would result in margins large enough to support a run rate of approximately 10% to 12% ROE consistent with our historic levels of profitability.
Page 9 addresses this risk related to our balance sheet and Page 10 addresses our off-balance sheet investments.
To be clear, our pipeline is a 12 month pipeline and does not reflect these increases.
We also had a strong quarter of distributable net investment income of approximately $43 million, which is up 36% year-over-year and recorded a gain on sale of $19 million.
On Slide 7, we detail our $3.9 billion balance sheet portfolio as of the third quarter of 2022, which has grown 22% over the last year.
Today, we're pleased to announce the successful debt raise of $383 million, contributing to our strong liquidity position, including cash from operations of over $1.2 billion, which gives us ample runway for funding new deals.
Please note, we have an updated cash sources and uses slide on Page 15 in the appendix in the format that we began utilizing in the second quarter, reflecting that net cash collections remain well above the dividend.
While the yield on our $3.9 billion portfolio remains unchanged in the quarter, we expect the yield will increase proportionately as we fund new investments.
Funding expectations of previously closed transactions is over $625 million expected to fund through 2023.
The bottom portion of this slide reflects our illustrative business model in a rising rate environment, depicted as a percent of assets that reconciles back to our targeted ROE range of 10% to 12%.