Net operating income for the quarter increased slightly to $30.4 million in 2022 due to continued improvements in our enclosed mall portfolio results.
FFO for the quarter also increased slightly to $16.6 million in 2022 as compared to a year ago.
For the rest of 2022, there's approximately 200,000 square foot in retail GLA coming due.
Same-asset net operating income for the third quarter improved 1% from a year ago, buoyed by a 4% increase in same-asset results for our enclosed mall portfolio.
This project will cost approximately $3 million from a landlord perspective and will be completed in early 2023.
We spent approximately $13 million of the $18.5 million 9-month allocation, but we do expect to be more active on the spending in the last quarter of the year, which is typical for us and into next year as we catch up on delayed capital projects and look at higher leasing volumes.
Our current occupancy level for all asset classes of 91% has only changed slightly from the start of the pandemic, which was 93%.
Year-to-date, our interest expenses declined $0.5 million due to the lower debt levels.
As part of the refinancing of this mortgage, we are looking at a $35 million pay down funded by our lines of credits.
Our overall occupancy levels of 91% at September 30 remained slightly higher than both year-end and a year ago.
The REIT's PCME or operating and leasing capital reserve was established to be $25 million for the year, which is back to normal levels.
The Trust has also reached an agreement with Teamtown to convert the empty Home Outfitters space at Heritage Town Center in Calgary into a 34,000-square-foot retail store.
The impact of lower debt of approximately $30 million on a year-over-year basis has been offset by higher short-term borrowing rates due to the higher interest rate environment that we find ourselves in.
Combined with earlier 2022 adjustments, we've recorded a $36 million fair value loss on a year-to-date basis.
This represented primarily a 25 basis point expansion of cap rates for enclosed mall retail and non-Vancouver office.
During the quarter, we had a $73 million fair value loss on our real estate properties as we were required to adjust these assets to fair market value under IFRS.