We are raising our 2022 OFFO guidance to a range of $1.16 to $1.17 per share.
Same-store NOI grew 1.1% in the third quarter with the uncollectible revenue line item, a 160 basis point headwind to year-over-year growth.
These operational factors totaled about $0.01 per share relative to budget.
We provided an updated schedule on the expected ramp-up of the pipeline on Page 6 of our earnings slides.
Included in uncollectible revenue this quarter were $510,000 of reserves related to unpaid revenue from Cineworld as a result of its recent bankruptcy filing.
We had another quarter recycling capital, highlighted by the sale of the previously announced Madison Pool A portfolio for $388 million.
First, as I previously mentioned, we had $300,000 of nonrecurring, uncollectible revenue and $200,000 of nonrecurring straight-line rent in the third quarter.
We underwrote a 5-year NOI CAGR of 3% plus with minimal CapEx, which is consistent with our existing convenience portfolio and one of the key attributes of our thesis.
The quarter also included $200,000 of unbudgeted straight-line rent from the conversion of cash-basis tenants and $300,000 from payments and settlements related to prior periods.
A summary of these factors is on Page 9 of our earnings slides.
This activity, along with execution from our leasing team, resulted in a 60 basis point sequential increase of our portfolio lease rate to 95%, which is consistent with our commentary and goals for the year.
Looking forward, we have another 250,000 square feet at share in lease negotiations, which we expect to be completed over the next 2 quarters with activity from a mix of national publicly traded credit tenants.
Despite that, the SNO pipeline was effectively unchanged at $22 million as new leases were added and offset the impact of commencements.
The largest investment this quarter was the acquisition of a 4-property portfolio for $23 million in Phoenix, Arizona, which is a top 10 market for the company and a market we've transacted in a number of times in the last year.
As noted, demand and activity remained very high in the third quarter with 1.5 million square feet leased, which is the largest amount of total square footage this company has leased in 5 years despite a materially smaller footprint.
The projects broken out on our tackle-development pipeline that are under construction are now 84% leased with deliveries beginning this year into 2024 with immediate expected accretion.