On a positive note, earnings available for distribution for the third quarter remained strong at $1.39 per common share given our rotation into higher-yielding agency mortgages, along with favorable funding and a relatively low-cost legacy swap portfolio.
Mortgages have now performed poorly for 4 consecutive quarters, and the drivers have largely remained the same.
Given this challenging backdrop, our book value declined during the quarter ending September at $12.80.
Financial conditions tightened during the third quarter of 2022 as the FOMC increased the Fed funds rate on 2 separate occasions by a total of 150 basis points and then subsequently added a further 75 basis point hike yesterday in response to inflation levels that persist at multi-decade highs.
However, sentiment quickly shifted negative in August and worsened in September, resulting in September representing the worst month for the sector on record and the third quarter representing the worst quarter in 11 years.
Combined with the previous 3 quarters, the sector also concluded its worst year ever.
With paydowns on the agency mortgage portion of the Fed's balance sheet approximately $20 billion to $25 billion per month in the third quarter, it is unlikely the $35 billion cap will be restrictive absent a significant drop in mortgage rates and resulting increase in refinancing and housing activity.
Since the beginning of the fourth quarter, agency mortgage performance has remained volatile, leading to a further decline in our book value of approximately 4.5%.
The cap on runoff of the Federal Reserve's agency mortgage portfolio increased to $35 billion per month in September versus the previous cap of $17.5 billion, leading to a modest increase of net supply to the market.
Although we anticipate limited near-term price appreciation, we believe these assets are attractive holdings as 100% are held on an unlevered basis and provide favorable unlevered yields.
The period end weighted average yield on our Agency RMBS investments improved from 4.07% at the end of the second quarter to 4.65% at the end of the third quarter, capturing a significant improvement in available returns given wider spreads and higher interest rates during the quarter.
During the quarter, yields on maturities less than 1 year increased approximately 150 basis points, while longer-dated maturities increased roughly half that amount, reflecting the expectation that longer-term inflation should decline from the heightened levels of the current environment.
Given the decrease in book value and repurchases of preferred stock, our economic leverage increased to 5.3x.
In order to hedge additional exposures further out the yield curve, we continue to hold $700 million net notional of forward starting interest rate swaps with starting dates in 2023.
Positively, 80% of our repo costs are hedged by current pay interest rate swaps, and the increase in our asset yields as a result of our rotation into higher coupon Agency RMBS also served to offset the increase in our funding costs.
Since the inception of the repurchase program in May of '22, we have repurchased 5.3 million shares of our Series B and Series C preferred stock, representing approximately 30% of our preferred stock outstanding prior to the start of the program.