For the 3 months ended September 30, 2022, we recorded net income attributable to common stockholders of $37 million or $1.32 per diluted share.
We generated total revenues of $71 million for the quarter, a 32% increase from Q3 of last year.
Adjusted funds from operations for the quarter, which adds back noncash stock-based compensation and noncash interest expense related to our unsecured senior notes to normalized FFO was $60 million or $2.13 per diluted share.
Now to recap the quarter, we generated total revenues of $71 million in Q3, with growth in excess of 30% over the prior year's third quarter.
Total capital raising for Q3 was $6.2 billion compared to $29.4 billion raised in the third quarter of last year.
I'd also note that capital raising has noticeably diminished in the public REIT markets as well during Q3, with total capital raising in terms of both debt and equity being the lowest since Q4 of 2009, the depth of the -- great Recession.
As we have noted throughout our 6 years of reporting our results to you all, we continue to have a deep conviction in the long-term growth prospects of the regulated cannabis industry and are positioned as the preeminent provider of real estate capital for operators mission-critical real estate.
On October 14, we paid our quarterly dividend of $1.80 per share to common stockholders of record as of September 30, equivalent to an annualized dividend of $7.20 per common share.
Our operating portfolio is split between 67 cultivation in ore processing facilities, representing 90% of our invested capital, 33 retail locations, representing 3% of our invested capital and 9 facilities conducting combined cultivation and processing and retail activities, representing 7% of our invested capital.
Beginning this quarter, we have bifurcated our portfolio between our operating portfolio, consisting of 109 properties and construction in progress or CIP, comprising the 2 development projects previously leased to Kings Garden and the expansion project at one property where Kings Garden continues to occupy the property pursuant to our settlement agreement with them.
That said, we are pleased with the progress we have made in placing capital over the course of the year with just under $370 million of new acquisitions and additional investments in the 9 months ended September 30.
And in terms of equity capital raised down 96% from the prior year period.
In fact, according to Viridian Capital Advisors, total capital raised for U.S. regulated cannabis operators was down by more than 2/3 during the first 3 quarters of 2022 versus 2021.
Rent collection for IIPs operating portfolio was 97% for the 9 months ended September 30, 2022, with only tenants Kings Garden and vertical not paying their full contractual rent.
In addition, as Alan noted, we executed on our first property disposition earlier this week, selling a Pennsylvania property that we originally acquired in 2019 and leased to Maitri, a private single-state operator for $23.5 million or approximately $461 per square foot, which is, of course, the price per square foot, well above our operating portfolio average of $272 per square foot and above what we originally paid for the property, including funded improvements.
No one state accounts for more than 17% of our total invested capital and no one of our 30 tenants accounts for more than 14% of our total invested capital.