Rising interest rates, on the other hand, are more of a concern given the impact it has on our earnings, making interest rate hedging and debt reduction our #1 priority for the foreseeable future.
As pleased as I am with the leasing performance in Q3, I'm just as happy that we were able to retire $800 million of maturing public bonds through a series of paydowns and financings that were done on attractive terms.
And we have marketing and capital plans in place that we believe will enable us to operate during this market cycle at or above 90% or better until things begin to turn around.
I think Matt and his team have done an excellent job with this as evidenced by the $1.25 billion of corporate swaps entered into during the third quarter to hedge future floating rate exposure.
I'm extremely, extremely pleased with the leasing performance in Q3, highlighted by the Franklin Templeton deal at One Madison Avenue and the Memorial Sloan Kettering deal at 885 Third Avenue, which took a total of over 750,000 square feet of vacancy out of the SL Green portfolio (inaudible) economic terms that were consistent with our expectations.
We completed 2 dozen individual sales transactions at a gross price at share of $5 billion.
And just yesterday, we swapped another $200 million on a floating rate mortgage.
In addition, during the most recent quarter, we entered into cap contracts and another $270 million of variable rate property debt.
We developed and acquired new world-class assets, oversaw and executed $2.25 billion of physical construction projects for on-time deliveries, reduced our DPE balance to $663 million at quarter end.
Last week, we received the excellent news that Le Pavillon received a Michelin Star less than 18 months after opening during the pandemic.
And as a result, the portfolio is still well occupied today at 92%.
In less than 3 years, we signed over 5 million square feet of office leases.
Notwithstanding the current interest rate environment, the underlying New York City economy is still chugging along based on employment data showing that NYC added 24,000 private sector jobs in August and is now 100,000 jobs ahead of New York City OMB's original 2022 forecast.
I want to once again express my extreme gratitude to the amazing and talented workforce here at SL Green, who came together, all of us on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange, to ring the closing bell and celebrate 25 years of excellence and improving the way which New Yorkers live, work and play.
We managed our portfolio in a safe, secure and efficient manner, launched a portfolio-wide hospitality and amenity program, and we did all of this throughout by working 5 days a week from office, the only possible way we could have realized these extraordinary accomplishments.
During the third quarter, we prevailed in consolidating ownership and control of 245 Park Avenue, a trophy asset in the SL Green Corridor of owned properties after a contentious bankruptcy litigation.