Core FFO and AFFO for the quarter were $0.97 and $0.96 per share, representing 5.6% and 7.8% year-over-year increases, respectively.
Given the increased visibility into our high-quality pipeline, we are increasing the bottom end of our acquisition guidance to $1.6 billion while maintaining the high end of our guidance at $1.7 billion.
And in September, we completed a $5.8 million share forward offering for anticipated net proceeds of approximately $382 million upon settlement.
At quarter end, we still had 5.8 million shares anticipated to be settled from the September forward offering, representing anticipated net proceeds of approximately $382 million.
These metrics demonstrate our continued focus on leveraging all 3 external growth platforms to execute on opportunities with best-in-class operators.
Given our year-to-date activity, we are increasing the lower end of our disposition guidance range to $45 million while maintaining the upper end of our range at $75 million.
Construction continued on 18 additional projects.
During the quarter, we raised more than $0.5 billion of additional forward equity.
In conjunction with the September forward equity offering, we settled all 8.7 million shares of outstanding forward equity, realizing net proceeds of approximately $601 million.
We also completed the development of 2 Gerber Collisions locations as well as Burlington.
The monthly dividend reflects an annualized dividend amount of $2.88 per share or a 5.7% increase over the annualized dividend amount of $2.72 per share from the fourth quarter of 2021.
Our investment activities were supported by almost $815 million of equity and debt raised during the quarter that fortified our balance sheet.
At quarter end, our fortress balance sheet stood at approximately 3.1x pro forma net debt to EBITDA, providing tremendous flexibility and enabling us to opportunistically execute as buyers and sellers continue to adjust to the market.
In connection with the offering, we terminated related swap agreements of $300 million, receiving the approximately $28 million upon termination.
In August, we completed a $300 million public bond offering, comprised of 4.8% senior unsecured notes due in 2032.
We selectively invested approximately $372 million in 121 properties across our 3 external growth platforms.