Adjusted company FFO for the quarter was approximately $48 million or $0.17 per diluted common share.
The new declared quarterly common share dividend, which will be paid in the first quarter of 2023, will be $0.125 per share, representing an increase of approximately 4.2% over the prior quarterly dividend.
Going forward, share repurchases will be considered in the context of maintaining leverage within our target range of 6 to 7x net debt to adjusted EBITDA and development funding needs.
Our industrial portfolio continues to perform well with quarterly same-store NOI growth of 6.2%.
Asset sales for the quarter totaled $92 million at weighted average GAAP and cash cap rates of 5.4% and 5.1%, respectively.
Additionally, our weighted average lease term of 6.4 years, investment-grade tenancy of 59.1%, average building age of 8.6 years and functional utility of our industrial assets provides us with stability and valuable defensive attributes.
In fact, our industrial portfolio cash rents today are forecasted to grow on average 43% for lease expirations through 2028 or 33% when adjusted for rent escalations based on independent broker estimates.
We returned capital to shareholders during the quarter through the repurchase of 5.6 million common shares at an average price of $10.16 per share.
After selling our remaining 2 Louisiana industrial assets in the second quarter, we sold 1 industrial asset in the third quarter, which marked our departure from Oregon.
In addition to refreshing our Board with 7 new independent members since 2015, our Nominating Committee recently adopted a resolution to recommend Jamie Handwerker as the next lead trustee in May 2023 when our current lead trustee, Richard Frary, steps down.
We currently estimate our industrial portfolios and place leases to be approximately 20% below market based on independent broker estimates, presenting us with significant future mark-to-market opportunities.
Year-to-date, we've returned a total of $131 million to shareholders via share repurchase activity.
We are in the home stretch for dispositions in our office and other assets portfolio, with 2 properties sold during the quarter, 1 subsequent to quarter end and an additional 5 currently targeted to be sold by year-end or first quarter 2023.
Third quarter revenue was approximately $80 million, with property operating expenses of $14 million, of which 85% was attributable to tenant reimbursement.
With respect to the remaining 2023 expirations, we expect expiring rents to increase within a range of 40% to 50% based on current negotiations and third-party broker estimates.
Development funding in our ongoing 6 projects was roughly $71 million in the quarter.