GAAP net income available to common stockholders was $180 million or $1.27 per share and diluted net income of $1.13 per share.
ARI reported another stable quarter of financial results in Q3, with distributable earnings prior to the realized gain on investments of $52 million or $0.37 per share.
Importantly, we expect ARI's robust pace of originations over the past 18 months will enable the company to continue generating distributable earnings that support the common stock dividend while maintaining a more selective approach to any incremental capital deployment consistent with a focus on maintaining liquidity and balance sheet flexibility.
Approximately, 1/3 of ARI's U.K. exposure is in retail assets, which include outlet centers and retail warehouse properties, both of which have typically outperformed traditional retail due to lower occupancy cost and a focus on discounted goods.
The progress with our focused loans positively impacted our book value per share this quarter, which prior to the general CECL allowance and depreciation increased 6% to $16.12 and as compared to $15.19 at the end of the second quarter.
ARI ended the quarter with over $1.1 billion of unencumbered assets and a debt-to-equity ratio of 2.8 times.
During the quarter, ARI repaid $345 million of convertible notes that matured in August with existing liquidity and without the need to access the choppy capital markets.
In taking this approach, ARI is fortunate to benefit from Apollo's broader commercial real estate debt platform, which originates over $10 billion of loan transactions per year.
An additional increase of 50 basis points in the U.S. and the U.K. and Europe would lead to an incremental $0.04 and $0.03 per share, respectively, of net interest income.
At quarter end, ARI had 25 positions in Europe totaling $3.8 billion, approximately 2/3 of which are secured by properties in the United Kingdom.
As such, ARI reversed $53 million of the previously recorded $68 million loan impairment and we'll retain some additional performance-based economics that may result in additional recapture of the remaining impairment.
Based upon the units closed subsequent to quarter end as well as units under contract that are expected to close by year-end, we anticipate ARI's exposure will be reduced by approximately $150 million by the end of this year.
99% of the portfolio consists of senior loans and the portfolio has a weighted average LTV of 62%.
In addition, 5 loans totaling $900 million have debt subordinated to ARI's senior mortgage position.
The bank is also providing 75% financing to ARI for its portion of the senior loan.
The investment was transferred to ARI's balance sheet as real estate owned, and ARI recognized a $44 million gain to book value, which reflects the difference between the prior loan balance and the current fair value of the development.