As you can see, our Q3 consolidated property revenue of $2.6 billion increased by over 10% and over 14% on an FX-neutral basis as compared to the prior year period.
It should also be noted that VIL did express a commitment to revert back to 100% payment at the start of 2023 and repay outstanding pass-through balances, which could potentially provide an opportunity to reverse certain reserves we've taken in the future.
We are lowering our attributable AFFO guidance by $40 million or $0.09 on a per share basis.
Our third quarter adjusted EBITDA grew nearly 6% or over 8.5% on an FX-neutral basis to over $1.6 billion with strong revenue growth and cost controls, partially offset by the negative impacts of Vodafone Idea revenue reserves and Sprint related churn, together representing approximately 6% headwinds to growth.
Together, these result in a reduction in adjusted EBITDA and attributable AFFO of $125 million.
We anticipate this will result in $5 billion of incremental annual customer CapEx spend in the United States, on average, as compared to the levels we saw throughout the 4G cycle.
Consequently, our full year expectations now include approximately $95 million in additional revenue reserves, about half of which was booked in Q3.
Next, we closed on Stonepeak's initial $2.5 billion investment in our U.S. data center business in August which was upsized by another $570 million after quarter end at the same valuation in terms.
So far in 2022, CoreSite has achieved solid new business volumes, a reflection of the strong demand for the company's interconnection and cloud on-ramp rich ecosystem, where over 80% of revenues are derived by customers with a variety of interconnections to at least 5 different and independent customers.
This includes $95 million in revenue reserves split between Q3 and Q4 and the removal of our previous assumption for incremental bad debt reversals of around $30 million.
We still believe this acquisition further positions us to take advantage of the emerging digital transformation enabled by 5G. Having now owned CoreSite for more than 3 quarters, we couldn't be happier with the performance we're seeing across the business and the use cases driving leasing activity, which we expect to serve as growth catalysts well into the future.
As we saw during the rollout of 4G, we expect this investment cycle to play out in 2 broad phases.
As you can see on Slide 8, we are raising our property revenue outlook by $70 million at the midpoint.
This outperformance includes straight-line upside of approximately $65 million, primarily associated with our recently executed Verizon and Airtel Africa MLAs and $77 million in higher pass-through revenue driven by fuel costs, along with various nonrecurring benefits, including accelerated decommissioning-related settlements in Latin America, which we now expect to total approximately $85 million for the full year.
In APAC, we saw organic growth of 1.9%, in line with our expectations, which comes alongside a continuation of solid new build activity with 1,200 sites constructed during the quarter.
Our agreements with both Verizon and Airtel Africa, 2 of our largest customers is the latest demonstration of the value our global scale and operational capabilities as a company, both in markets and across borders, can unlock to provide mutually beneficial solutions for American Tower and our partners.