We reported FFO per share as adjusted of $0.66 for the quarter, representing 18% growth over last year.
We also provided an improved outlook for our same-store revenue growth for the year with a new bidding point of 12.5% growth over 2021 levels and an improved same-store NOI range with a new midpoint of 16% growth.
Same-store expense growth at 4.3% for the quarter was in line with our expectations and continues to be driven by pressure on real estate taxes, utilities and property insurance, offset by efficiencies and personnel costs and lower advertising spend.
Headline results included same-store revenue growth of 12.2%.
Based on continued strong operating fundamentals, we've increased our guidance range for full year FFO per share by $0.02 at the midpoint.
Ultimately, we closed on the sale of all 14 assets to an unaffiliated third-party buyer in August.
Same-store occupancy levels remain very healthy while continuing to return to more normal seasonal patterns throughout the year averaging 94.4% in the third quarter and ending the quarter at 93.8%.
Back in March of 2020, we were looking at a 14 store portfolio that was on the market and determined that it wasn't a great fit for our on-balance sheet investment strategy given the markets and asset quality.
We acquired one store in Atlanta during the quarter for $20.7 million, but from a transactional perspective, as Chris mentioned, the most notable activity for us during the quarter was related to the sale of the assets in one of our joint ventures.
Ultimately, we received $51.5 million of distributions during including the sale in August of '22, for a net cash to us of $45.9 million over a 2.5-year period.
The percentage of our customers who have been with us for more than 2 years is up about 640 basis points and the percentage of our stores impacted by new supply has declined by about 15%.
Expenses grew 4.3% and NOI growth was 15.4% for the quarter.
If you look at a few facts comparing same-store in the third quarter of '22 to the pre-pandemic third quarter of 2019, our occupancy is up 130 basis points, our asking rates are up 36%.
So as we've done many times, we looked for a creative solution and ended up acquiring the stores along with a partner with Cube being the minority 10% of the equity in a structure that gave us a promoted interest opportunity.
From a return standpoint, for our position in the transaction, we invested -- back in March of '20, we invested $5.6 million.
On the third-party management front, we added 39 stores in the third quarter and ended the quarter with 663 third-party stores under management.