For the third quarter, we reported normalized FFO of negative $0.06 per share.
Based on projects previously underway and starting in the fourth quarter, we anticipate spending approximately $115 million for the remainder of the year.
The decrease in our same-property portfolio was attributable to a variety of factors that I would classify broadly into 3 categories.
Same-property cash basis NOI in our office portfolio segment increased 4.7% year-over-year and 1.2% compared to the second quarter, while it was a challenging quarter in terms of shop segment expenses on which we'll provide more detail shortly.
And we ended the quarter with over $800 million of cash and limited near-term debt maturities, providing us the liquidity necessary to continue with our plan to invest in our shop segment communities to drive this portfolio towards stabilization.
Our consolidated cash basis NOI decreased approximately $13.2 million from the second quarter with $12.2 million of that decrease coming from the SHOP segment, which included a $7.5 million decrease in the same-property SHOP communities and a $4.7 million decrease in our non-same-property portfolio.
While the operators of our SHOP segment were able to grow average occupancy by 110 basis points from the last quarter, while also growing revenue 9.7% year-over-year.
Our operators drove a meaningful improvement in shop occupancy compared to the second quarter, with an increase of 110 basis points for the total portfolio, representing our sixth consecutive quarter of occupancy growth.
At quarter end, we had over $800 million of cash and restricted cash on hand, which we plan to use for capital investments and debt repayment.
At quarter end, we had total outstanding debt of $3.1 billion and net debt of $2.3 billion was equal to just 29% of gross assets.
The number of senior living units under construction is at its lowest level since 2015, with inventory growth moderating to just 1.4% year-over-year.
While same-property occupancy decreased slightly during the third quarter to 90.2%, there was no significant vacancies driving this result.
Leasing velocity in the third quarter remained generally in line with our 3-year quarterly average as we executed over 220,000 square feet of new and renewal leases with average roll-up in rents of 2.4% and a weighted average lease term of 5.8 years.
During the first 3 quarters, we spent approximately $195 million on capital improvements across the portfolio.
In the third quarter, we spent $70 million on capital expenditures across our portfolio, which included approximately $52.9 million of capital improvements within the SHOP segment and $16.9 million of capital was deployed in the office portfolio.
Based on available census data, the 80-plus demographic is projected to increase an average of 3.7% per year over the next 2 years compared to the 2% compounded annual growth rate over the last 5 years.