So for the third quarter, we reported GAAP net income per share of $0.60, while distributable earnings were $0.71 per share.
We reported a GAAP net income of $0.60 per share and distributable earnings of $0.71, which is up $0.04 from 2Q and $0.09 or 15% from 1Q levels.
A few weeks ago, we paid a dividend of $0.62 per share with respect to the third quarter.
With the strong credit performance of our loan portfolio and the stability of our capital structure, we will receive 0 margin calls in the history of BXMT, including during the challenging market conditions experienced at the peak of the pandemic in 2020.
This powerful earnings dynamic creates meaningful resilience for our business in 2 ways: first, building book value, which helps insulate against increasing reserves or potential credit issues, and second, ensuring our dividend remains well covered in a wide range of scenarios.
This quarter, we generated $0.71 of distributable earnings, up an impressive 13% year-over-year.
We increased our CECL loan loss reserve by $0.07 per share this quarter and $0.13 year-to-date, which amount does not include any specific loan reserves but rather is reflective of uncertainty in the broader economy and the related potential impact on our loan portfolio over time as required by the CECL accounting rules.
Further, we increased liquidity to a record $1.7 billion and nearly a 60% increase from this time last year, giving us capital to deploy opportunistically or reserve to defend our assets should market conditions worsen.
This reflects the positive impact of rising base rates on our 99% performing loan portfolio continuing to flow through to our bottom line net income.
These loans, which represent just 3% of our portfolio, continue to perform, pay interest, and, in most cases, show positive leasing and material recent sponsor cash commitments.
Our office portfolio is 92% Class A, 100% performing, and generally characterized by high-quality, well-amenitized buildings that are outperforming in today's leasing environment.
The third quarter average SOFR was 2.45, and it is already 120 basis points higher at 365 today.
Notwithstanding this impact, our book value was still up slightly this quarter to $27.20 as our earnings more than covered our dividend, adding $0.10 to book value.
We've paid that dividend for 29 consecutive quarters, and we're covering at over 115% today.
Our overall originations this quarter averaged 58% LTV and an all-in yield of 541 over base rates, a high single-digit all-in unlevered return.
Our current dividend yield is 620 basis points above the tenure, well wide of our pre-Covid average, despite our company now having growing earnings, significantly stronger dividend coverage, a high integrity balance sheet with more than double the liquidity, and a performing portfolio that has been reoriented to stand up to today's inflationary pressures.