As depicted on Slide 3, revenues for Q3 were $1.84 billion, up 11% over the same quarter last year, driven by strong recurring revenue growth.
As depicted on Slide 4, global Q3 revenues were $1.841 billion, up 11% over the same quarter last year, above the top end of our guidance range on an FX-neutral basis, largely due to strong recurring revenues.
And as a result, our AFFO per share is now expected to grow between 9% and 10% on a normalized and constant currency basis, above the top end of our prior guide, including the impact from our Q3 ATM activity.
This vigorous demand backdrop fueled another great quarter, delivering record gross and net bookings with strong demand across all 3 regions, resulting in our 79th quarter of consecutive revenue growth and further demonstrating the resiliency and durability of our business even in the face of a complex and challenging macro environment.
Finally, 2022 CapEx is now expected to range between $2.1 billion and $2.3 billion, including about $190 million of recurring CapEx and about $135 million of on-balance sheet xScale spend, down slightly due to timing of expansion spend.
Our net leverage remains low at 3.5x our adjusted EBITDA, creating plenty of balance sheet flexibility.
For the full year 2022, due to strong momentum that we're seeing in the organic business, we now expect our revenues to increase between 10% and 11% on a normalized and constant currency basis over the prior year.
Our balance sheet increased slightly despite the weaker non-U.S. operating currencies to $29.3 billion, including an unrestricted cash balance of $2.5 billion.
For Q4, we expect MRR churn to continue to trend at the lower end of our 2% to 2.5% per quarter range.
We're raising our underlying 2022 AFFO by $52 million to grow between 10% and 11% on a normalized and constant currency basis due to strong operating performance and lower net interest expense.
Global Q3 adjusted EBITDA was $871 million or 47% of revenues, up 11% over the same quarter last year, above the top end of our guidance range due to strong cash gross profit and lower-than-planned operating costs, including professional fees and consulting costs.
Our go-to-market engine delivered record gross and net bookings in Q3, closing over 4,200 deals with more than 3,000 customers.
Internet Exchange saw peak traffic up 8% quarter-over-quarter and 28% year-over-year to greater than 27 terabits per second, representing the largest peak traffic growth since prior to the pandemic.
Turning to our regional highlights, whose full results are covered on Slides 5 through 7.
Our channel program delivered a sixth consecutive record quarter, accounting for 37% of bookings and approximately 60% of new logos and remains a critical vector in how we are expanding our reach and scaling our go-to-market engine.
In August, we added Lima, Peru to our platform as part of the Entel acquisition, expanding our Latin American footprint to a fifth country and extending the Equinix platform to 32 countries and 71 markets globally.