The primary driver of the difference between our third quarter GAAP earnings per share and distributable earnings per share is approximately $19.5 million or about $0.36 per share in CECL provision we recorded during the quarter.
Overall, our distributable earnings for the third quarter were supported by the positive benefits of rising interest rates and the continued contributions from our proactive approach to liability hedging that we put in place in early 2021 when market interest rates were materially lower than they are today, and allowed us to lock in 1-month LIBOR at 21 basis points.
More specifically, the risk ratings on 3 loans, each backed by office properties, were downgraded from 3 to 4 due to our outlook on their respective business plans and our macroeconomic viewpoint of their respective submarkets.
This level of repayments was in line with our 6 quarter average and included a $30 million hospitality loan, was a risk-rated 4 loan 1 year ago and was repaid at [par] during the third quarter.
This provision served to increase our overall CECL reserve to $51.9 million or approximately 1.9% of the total commitments of our loan portfolio, which I will cover shortly in more detail.
In addition, the risk rating of 1 residential loan changed from 4 to 5.
For example, on a pro forma basis, if LIBOR was 100 basis points higher than the actual September 30, 2022 levels and all other aspects of our portfolio remain constant as of the same date, our annualized distributable earnings as of the third quarter of 2022 would have been higher by approximately $11 million or $0.20 per share on a pro forma basis.
Despite the slower market, we had $167 million of repayments during the third quarter.
Here, we expect the sale of the underlying property in the fourth quarter below our carrying value, resulting in a loss of approximately $2.4 million should the transaction be consummated.
We believe these securities are highly attractive investments, with weighted average credit spreads of 245 basis points, resulting in unlevered yield today in excess of 6% at current SOFR rates, all backed by a diversified pool of underlying commercial real estate properties with LTVs of 30% to 40%.
Our borrowing base remains highly diversified across 8 various financing sources.
We closed $50 million of floating rate investments across multifamily and self-storage properties, and $28 million of AAA-rated newly issued CRE liquid debt securities.
The all-in spread on the home loan was 80 basis points higher than our post-pandemic average spreads for multifamily home loans and with a greater equity subordination and enhanced structural terms, further driving the attractiveness of the loan.
We ended the quarter with a loan portfolio consisting of 98% senior loans and an outstanding principal balance of $2.5 billion across 70 loans.
In terms of our overall CECL reserve, we increased our total reserve by $19.5 million as of the third quarter of 2022, and our total CECL reserve now stands at $51.9 million or 1.9% of our total loan commitments.
In terms of our other credit quality metrics, 90% of our loan portfolio had a risk rating of 3 or better, which declined from 94% last quarter and primarily reflects the negative migration of 4 loans during the third quarter.