Seven Hills generated distributable earnings, or DE, of $3.9 million or $0.27 per share.
During the quarter, distributable earnings per share increased 13% on a sequential quarter basis.
On a sequential quarter basis, this represents an increase of approximately 13% compared to DE of $0.24 per share in the previous quarter.
Our quarterly distribution of $0.25 per share was well covered, and total committed capital increased to more than $760 million.
While we have a pipeline of $500 million of potential transactions, our lending activity over the rest of the year will largely depend on capital availability and the overall market environment.
Earlier this month, we announced our regular quarterly dividend of $0.25 per share.
We currently have a $24 million loan under application for the acquisition of an industrial property, which we expect to close next month, subject to our final due diligence.
Despite our continued growth, our stock is trading at approximately 1/2 of our September 30 adjusted book value of $18.80 per share.
At the end of the third quarter, our total loan portfolio consisted of 39% office, 28% multifamily, 19% retail and 14% industrial.
Tiffany brings more than 20 years of accounting experience, including 15 years in public accounting as well as various corporate finance and accounting leadership roles within The RMR Group and other public companies.
The credit quality of our portfolio remains strong with all of our loans current at debt service, and our weighted average risk rating remains below 3.
Interest income grew by 31% sequentially to $11.7 million.
Our borrowing base remains diversified across 4 financing sources.
Additionally, we have an accepted term sheet for acquisition financing of an additional industrial property with a respective loan balance of $26.5 million.
All of our loans continue to perform, and none of our loans are rated 5.
In addition, late last week, we received a $22.5 million repayment of an unlevered loan on a retail property in Los Angeles.