Sales for the third quarter totaled $195 million, while operating income was $41 million and net income attributable to Rayonier was $21 million or $0.14 per share.
On a pro forma basis, net income was $22 million or $0.15 per share after adjusting for a $1.1 million timber write-off related to a fire in Washington.
We achieved earnings per share of $0.15 and adjusted EBITDA of $65 million in the third quarter.
Accordingly, we now expect full year adjusted EBITDA toward the lower end of our prior guidance of $55 million to $60 million.
As Dave noted, we anticipate closing on a new 5-year $250 million term loan through the Farm Credit system in the fourth quarter to partially fund our pending acquisitions.
Let's start on Page 5 with our financial highlights.
In our New Zealand Timber segment, we now expect full year harvest volumes toward the lower end of the 2.6 million to 2.7 million ton range we provided in August.
As Mark will discuss in greater detail later in the call, we remain on track to achieve our full year adjusted EBITDA guidance of $310 million to $330 million with our Southern Timber and Pacific Northwest Timber segments, both expected to post record years in 2022.
In our Pacific Northwest Timber segment, we now expect full year harvest volumes toward the lower end of the 1.6 million to 1.7 million ton range we provided in August.
In our Real Estate segment, we expect full year adjusted EBITDA toward the lower end of our prior guidance range of $74 million to $79 million, primarily due to the delayed timing of a few transactions as well as a modest slowdown in rural land sales activity.
Similar to our Southern Timber segment, we continue to expect a record year in our Pacific Northwest Timber segment with adjusted EBITDA towards the higher end of our prior guidance of $59 million to $63 million.
Specifically, we announced that we've entered into 2 separate agreements to acquire approximately 172,400 acres of high-quality commercial timberlands located in Texas, Georgia, Alabama and Louisiana for an aggregate purchase price of $474 million from Manulife Investment Management, a leading timber investment manager.
Overall, we continue to expect record full year adjusted EBITDA in our Southern Timber segment with results in line with our prior guidance range of $156 million to $162 million.
We expect to close the acquisitions before year-end, and we anticipate financing the acquisitions with cash on hand as well as a $250 million term loan through the Farm Credit system.
Based on these factors, along with the expected contribution from the leased properties, we anticipate an annual average harvest level of approximately 860,000 tons from the acquisitions over the next decade and an increase in our U.S. South sustainable yield of 11% to 7 million tons per year.
With respect to our individual segments, in our Southern Timber segment, we still expect full year harvest volumes consistent with the 6.4 million to 6.6 million ton range we provided in August.