If we do not proceed with these 160 homes in the fourth quarter, they will move into 2023.
In Valencia, new home sales by builders totaled 166 during the third quarter, down 2 homes from the second quarter.
While the third quarter was a tough quarter for our primary residential land sale business, given the changing market conditions, our team executed efficiently and effectively while focusing on limiting our cash spend and managing costs, ending the quarter with a net loss of $9.5 million.
At quarter end, our balance sheet reflected $86 million of cash on hand and $0 drawn on our $125 million revolver, giving us available liquidity of $211 million.
Our anticipated Great Park land closings are projected to be approximately 253 home sites for the year versus last coverage projection of approximately 660 home sites, and we will push the sale of the remaining home sites into 2023 and pass these some into 2024.
No amounts were drawn on our $125 million revolver.
We report accepting bids on 8 of the 11 neighborhoods in the offering, anticipating year-end closings.
Our Great Park segment reported a loss of $13.8 million for the quarter, which was comprised of $4.5 million in income generated by our management company and an $18.3 million loss from the Venture's operations.
While no land sales were closed, we did recognize $15.4 million in revenue that was mostly generated by our Valencia and management company operations.
However, the segment did report revenue of $3.1 million.
Our debt to total capitalization ratio was stable at 25.3% and our net debt to capitalization ratio after taking into account our cash balance was 22.6%.
At the Great Park, we are actively marking approximately 80 acres we recently invested for sale.
Additionally, we anticipate moving forward with 2 neighborhoods in our Rise community, which should close before year-end.
During the third quarter, many of the builders paused their land purchases, and we currently anticipate only closing 2 of these neighborhoods before year-end.
During the third quarter, with the expansion of offerings in Solis Park, our newest community, builder in our Great Park community sold 82 homes, up from 47 homes in the first quarter.
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $12 million, which is consistent with the prior quarter and represents a reduction of 42% compared to the same quarter last year.