Our book value per share was $19.94 for Q3, which decreased by $3.65 per share for the quarter, primarily due to higher rates, spread widening and the continued declining valuations on our Agency portfolio, along with lower credit valuations, albeit more modest declines in comparison to the Agency book.
Additionally, our per share metrics are adjusted for our 1-for-4 reverse stock split effective in September 2022.
We generated earnings available for distribution of $1.06 per share.
Our outlook is optimistic for each of our 3 businesses over the medium term, but we will remain patient to grow the portfolio until we see evidence of volatility subsiding.
As mentioned, these are levels not seen since prior crisis episodes such as COVID and the 2008 financial crisis.
Now to put this in historical perspective, the total return for the Bloomberg US Aggregate Bond Market Index was negative 14.6% in the first 3 quarters of 2022, far worse than the negative 2.9% in 1994, the previous worst year in the history of the index.
Our swap in futures positions supported book value, providing a partial offset to the Agency declines mentioned above, contributing $6.93 per share to the book value during the quarter, and our MSR position added $0.09.
In light of the continuation of this difficult environment, Annaly experienced a negative economic return of 11.7% for the quarter.
The economic market value of the resi portfolio ended Q3 at $5.1 billion, a modest increase over Q2.
Our holdings grew by roughly $3 billion in market value as we patiently deployed the equity raise during the quarter, purchasing meaningfully fewer assets than implied by constant leverage on new capital.
We continued to rotate the portfolio up in coupon, significantly reducing our holdings of 3s and below while adding to our positions in 4.5s and 5s, which benefit from lower sensitivity to spread movements and better carrier.
We recently marked 25 years as a public company, and I was reminded of Annaly's resilience throughout numerous volatile market events such as long-term capital in 1998, the 2008 financial crisis, the taper tantrum and, most recently, the financial market dislocation at the onset of COVID.
And notwithstanding Fed portfolio runoff reaching its steady-state run rate of up to $95 billion per month, financing conditions should maintain support as cash remains ample.
As you discussed, after a brief respite in the first half of the quarter, interest rate volatility resumed its march higher, risk sentiment turned negative, and Agency MBS sharply underperformed interest rate hedges, with spreads widening 25 to 30 basis points.
And when the outlook improves, we're well positioned to take advantage of opportunities across our 3 businesses.
We continue to position ourselves defensively given sustained volatility and have strong liquidity with more than $6 billion in unencumbered assets, including $4.3 billion in cash and Agency MBS, which represents over 50% of our common equity as of quarter end.