The company reported a comprehensive loss of $2.20 per common share and a negative total economic return of 12.9%.
The benefit of interest rate hedge gain amortization was approximately $9 million or $0.21 for the third quarter and is estimated to be $12 million or $0.25 per common share for the next 5 quarters.
So now, with the existing position, we hold more than enough liquidity and capital to withstand the spread shock that we saw in 2008.
Earnings available for distribution, or EAD, was $0.24 this quarter.
So we see at least 4 positive catalysts for Agency RMBS in the intermediate term.
Prices have fallen and volatility have materially increased, especially during the last 2 to 3 weeks of the quarter.
Given these challenges and complexity, I want to maintain our tradition of transparency and open dialogue by simplifying my takeaways on the quarter to 5 key points:
As you can see on Chart 10, that is another 40 to 50 basis points wider from here in nominal spreads on the current coupon.
We prepared for this environment with the highest level of liquidity in over 5 years and the highest allocation to the most liquid instruments backed by U.S. real estate, agency-guaranteed residential mortgage-backed securities.
These realized hedge gains are recognized immediately for GAAP reporting but are deferred for tax and are amortized into REIT taxable income over the hedge period of approximately 10 years.
The book value decline we experienced in the third quarter is a function of these market moves, and mostly attributable to the gap wider by about 50 basis points in Agency RMBS spreads in late September.
Post quarter end, as spreads have continued to widen about 15 to 20 basis points across the coupons that we own, book value at the end of last week was down about 8% to 10% versus the quarter end.
We've also rolled about 20% of our repo book over year-end, and we continue to term out financing to minimize year-end issues.
We can trade our highly liquid futures hedges 24/6.
You can see this in Agency RMBS spreads, which widened dramatically in September and have continued the widening trend into the fourth quarter, now standing at levels within a few basis points of the peak spreads seen in March 2020, as shown in our slide deck on Page 10.
And you can see the direct results of that on Pages 11 and 12 on our slide deck.