Net loss attributable to common shares for the quarter was approximately $156 million or $0.66 per diluted share which includes a $216 million goodwill impairment charge related to our Uniti Fiber segment that was driven by an increase in the macro interest rate environment.
We reported consolidated revenues of $283 million, consolidated adjusted EBITDA of $225 million, AFFO attributed to common shares of $112 million and AFFO per diluted common share of $0.43.
For 2022 we still expect full year AFFO to range between $1.70 and $1.77 per diluted common share with a midpoint of $1.74 per diluted share, a 4% increase from 2021.
At Uniti Fiber, we reported revenues of $74 million and adjusted EBITDA of $29 million during the third quarter.
At Uniti Leasing, we reported segment revenues of $209 million and adjusted EBITDA of $203 million, both of which were up 5% from the prior year.
We expect net capital intensity to decline from our current level of approximately 35% to 5% to 10% by 2030 and is indicative of accelerating operating leverage in the business and many years of high margin and high-yielding lease-up, including dark fiber, lighting unique long-haul routes and expanding deeper into our existing 300 metro markets.
Consistent bookings balanced between anchor and lease-up along with installs that can be turned up quickly in our industry-leading monthly churn of 0.2% demonstrate that our strategy is sound and that we're executing on it well.
As a result of our consistently strong bookings activity, enterprise recurring revenue was up 16% during the quarter.
These investments not only expand our market share, but will result in very attractive economics for Uniti, resulting in cumulative cash yields of approximately 50% and IRRs of 30%.
Given the proven success of our anchor and lease-up strategies and the attractive economics of these enterprise opportunities, with payback periods of almost half the initial contract term and cash yields of 50% plus, we continue to actively prioritize these metro markets for expansion in both 2023 and beyond.
Although enterprise sales represent less than 5% of our total revenue today and will likely always represent a minority percentage, it remains a critical element of our lease-up strategy.
To reiterate, our strategy continues to focus on buying and building mission-critical fiber infrastructure and then leasing infrastructure to anchor customers in the 5% to 10% cash yield range and additional lease-up customers, driving cumulative cash yields above 10%.
The anchor cash yields are approximately 10% and we have a clear line of sight to a combined cash yield of low to mid-teens once leased up over the next few years.
As importantly, we also had another strong quarter of gross install activity with a mean time to deliver of less than 100 days.
A growing component of our wholesale strategy is wavelength services, which represent a $2 billion annual revenue opportunity today in North America and is expected to grow approximately 7% over the next several years.
In looking at our national wholesale network and our 300 metro markets combined, we estimate that less than 5% of our total 8 million strand miles of fiber are actually lit.