Turning to our fantastic results, KRG generated FFO as adjusted per share of $0.48, beating consensus estimates by $0.03 and representing a 45% increase per share over the comparable period last year.
For the third quarter, KRG generated $0.48 per share on an as-adjusted basis.
The culmination of all the great things I've just discussed is allowing us to raise our 2022 FFO as adjusted guidance to a range of $1.86 to $1.90, a $0.05 increase per share at the midpoint.
As John noted earlier, we are raising FFO as adjusted guidance to a range of $1.86 to $1.90, which is a $0.05 increase at the midpoint.
Of the top 10 open-air peers by total enterprise value, we rank first in year-over-year FFO growth, first in year-to-date blended cash spreads, first in NOI margin, first in recovery ratio, and first in year-over-year decrease in G&A as a percentage of total revenue.
For accounting purposes and based on our intent to issue fixed-rate unsecured debt in the future, we will be realizing the proceeds as an offset to interest expense amortized over the next 10 years, starting in 2023.
Given our same-store guidance was increased 50 basis points to 4.5% at the midpoint, it is safe to assume that our same-store growth for the balance of the year is expected to be largely in line with this quarter.
We received rezoning approval to convert 2.9 million square feet of commercial GLA to 1,745 multifamily units and 1.9 million square feet of commercial GLA.
On the development front, we have 4 active projects remaining with limited future capital commitments of just under $60 million.
Our same property NOI growth for the quarter was 4.4% and 4.7% year-to-date.
To provide some additional color on our spectacular leasing efforts year-to-date, I'd like to highlight 3 important metrics.
Looking a little further into the past, it is evident that the sheer velocity of positive change I witnessed at KRG over the past 4 years is unparalleled in my career.
We're also raising our 2022 same-property NOI growth assumption to a range of 4% to 5%, an increase of 50 basis points at the midpoint.
In addition to the robust leasing environment, we're making excellent progress on delivering our $38 million signed not open pipeline.
We achieved return on capital for comparable new leases of 37%.
Same-property NOI grew by 4.4% this quarter with 260 basis points of this growth being driven by contractual rent bumps and increased occupancy, and 100 basis points attributable to an increase in net recoveries.