For the third quarter of 2022, net mark available the common shareholders was a $1.10 per fully diluted share, versus $0.25 for fully diluted share in the prior quarter.
Core FFO for the quarter was $0.15 per fully diluted share, in line with last quarter.
Looking ahead, the sizable proceeds anticipated from Harborside 1, 2 and 3, in addition to potential further nonstrategic asset sales, will provide the company with substantial liquidity as we seek to conclude our transformation.
The transaction is expected to close in the first quarter of 2023 and result in approximately $350 million in net proceed, providing with substantial anticipated liquidity moving forward.
As evidenced by our binding agreement to sell Harborside 1, 2 and 3 and the completion of the sale of 101 Hudson Street, we're now in the final phase of our transformation.
In addition, I'd like to add some color on the difference between gross versus net proceeds expected upon the closing of the sale of Harbor Type 1, 2 and 3.
This is evident in our October blended net rental growth rate that remained strong in the mid-teens, but softened somewhat compared to the 20% achieved in the third quarter.
Our 5,825 unit same-store operating portfolio had occupancy of 95.7%, a blended net rental growth rate of 19% and a same-store year-over-year NOI growth of 21%, reflecting burn-off of existing concessions and increasing rents during the quarter.
Inclusive of these transactions and pro forma for the stabilization of Haus25, multifamily will represent approximately 98% of NOI, up from 39% around 18 months ago.
Headline rents continue to grow and the loss to lease in the portfolio reduced from 5% to approximately 2% during the quarter as we continue to capture upside in our portfolio, notwithstanding the challenging macroeconomic backdrop.
Our 5 Star rating, the highest rating offered to distinguish ESG leadership and performance, recognized Veris Residential for achieving this score among the highest 20% of all 1,800 participant companies.
Sequential same-store NOI declined by 2%, driven by higher noncontrollable expenses, namely taxes in Jersey City.
As one of our industry leaders in ESG, subsequent to the quarter, we were pleased to earn a 5 Star rating for our performance in the 2022 Global Real Estate Sustainability Benchmark, or GRESB, the global ESG benchmark for real estate and infrastructure investments.
We sign a binding agreement to sell Harborside 1, 2 and 3 for $420 million.
Our residents on the whole are seemingly well positioned to absorb the impact of increasing rents and inflationary pressures as evidenced by the increase in the average income of residents who signed leases during the third quarter as compared to the second quarter and a more than 20% increase compared to the same period last year.
We also announced the completion of our sale of 101 Hudson Street for $346 million, resulting in $90 million of total net proceeds, including $15 million that was held as a deposit.