Earlier this month, Pipeline announced that it has filed for a petition for reorganization relief under Chapter 11 protection.
Our unequaled results in rent collections through many years of operating volatility related to disruptive regulatory changes, the 2008 financial crisis, reimbursement uncertainties and evolving payment methodologies, Obamacare, the Affordable Care Act, and its continuing disruptions, uncertainties and after effects, three years of an unprecedented global pandemic that included virtually closing many hospitals for months.
The terms of these contracts generally range from 1 to 3 years.
Fiscal year '22 unadjusted EBITDA is projected to be between $50 million and $80 million.
We are almost at the point where no COVID grants will be included in the trailing 12 months.
Regarding coverages for the 12 months ending June 30 of this year, we continue to see the impact of the COVID grant monies rolling off the trailing 12-month period.
Recall that earlier this year, in recognition of inevitable inflationary and interest rate pressures, MPT restated and amended our $2 billion revolving credit facility and extended its term to mature with extension options to June of 2026.
The third quarter is expected to be more than $30 million.
The total portfolio was up 40 basis points, up 60 basis points for acute care, up 10 basis points for inpatient rehabs, up 20 basis points for behavioral health, and up 90 basis points for our long-term acute care facilities.
Similarly, earlier this year, MPT sold a 50% joint venture interest in our Massachusetts real estate that is leased to Steward.
In addition to the $1.5 billion, we have, of course, announced expected proceeds in 2023's first half from pending transactions that is Springstone and Yale of up to another $650 million.
This will be satisfied over the next 9 quarters.
Our earliest debt maturity is more than a year in the future when our GBP 400 million-pound sterling issue comes due in December 2023.
When we reported to you 3 months ago, Steward was in the middle of managing its cash flow to satisfy these cash requirements.
The JV simultaneously placed secured debt on that real estate and MPT recognized an approximate $600 million gain on the sale and received an aggregate of $1.3 billion in cash.
Contract labor in Q3 fiscal year '22 has decreased 30% from Q1 FY '22 run rate and is expected to decline an incremental 20% in Q4, resulting in a 50% decline since the first quarter of this year.