Net spread and dollar roll income, excluding catch-up am, was $0.84 per share for the quarter.
For the third quarter, AGNC had a comprehensive loss of $2.01 per share.
The slight increase from $0.83 per share for the second quarter was the result of higher asset yields and our large interest rate swap position, which more than offset higher funding costs and declining dollar roll income.
Economic return on tangible common equity was negative 17.4% for the quarter comprised of the decline in tangible net book value of approximately 20% and dividends declared of $0.36 per common share.
Historically, the few times that par coupon spreads reached levels beyond 150 basis points, it was short-lived and importantly, the funding markets were in distress and prepayment risk was high, neither is the case today.
In addition, we opportunistically issued approximately $290 million of common equity through our at-the-market offering program at an average price of $10.10 per share and issued $150 million of fixed rate reset preferred equity.
With the S&P 500 Index falling 17% and the unlevered Bloomberg Aggregate Bond Index falling 7.5% from their respective inter-quarter highs.
With primary mortgage rates now well above 7% and origination volume over the remainder of the year will likely be very limited, and the runoff of the Fed's portfolio will also be materially slower than previously anticipated.
To put the degree of mortgage spread widening during the month of September into perspective, the Bloomberg Mortgage Index, which is an index of all Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and Ginnie Mae MBS experienced its worst excess return versus treasuries on record going back more than 30 years.
Our average leverage for the quarter increased moderately to 8.1x tangible equity from 7.8x for the prior quarter.
At quarter end, we had cash and unencumbered Agency MBS totaling $3.6 billion, or 54% of our tangible equity and approximately $100 million of unencumbered credit securities.
As we have discussed, wider spreads impact our business in 2 ways.
This could reverse most of the prior year's gains over the coming 12 to 18 months.
After gradually firming up across the capital structure in the first 6 weeks of the quarter, the second half of Q3 largely reversed that spread tightening.
Our hedge portfolio totaled approximately $69 billion at quarter end, down about $3.5 billion from the previous quarter.
As you can see, the spread recently widened to the extreme of 190 basis points.