Last night, we reported third quarter 2022 FFO per share of $0.63 and third quarter 2022 net income attributable to common stockholders per share of $0.21.
We are, once again, increasing our '22 FFO per share guidance range to $2.30 to $2.34 per FFO share, with a midpoint of $2.32 per FFO share, a 3.6% increase from our previously updated guidance.
To hit a midpoint of $2.32, we are expecting Q4 to be approximately $0.54 per FFO share, which is a decrease from Q3 of approximately $0.09 per FFO share.
I also want to mention the Board of Directors has approved the quarterly dividend of $0.32 for the fourth quarter.
Third quarter FFO increased approximately $0.05 over the second quarter of '22 and is comprised of the following: First, the Embassy Suites Waikiki hotel increased by approximately $0.02 per FFO share during the high season of Q3 over Q2.
As you'll hear in a bit, we are now estimating 2022 to achieve our highest FFO per share since our IPO over 11 years ago, higher than pre-COVID 2019 FFO per share, and that is based on optimism for continued near-term growth across all our assets.
And second, two items that we look at as nonrecurring revenue and determining a run rate are: First, accelerated revenue recognition related to TI over straight-line rent related to the early termination of a tenant at City Center Bellevue, was approximately $0.02 per FFO share.
In Q3, we saw comparable retail leasing spreads increase approximately 7% and 28% on a cash basis and GAAP basis, respectively, buoyed by favorable leasing activity in the quarter, on the heels of Q2, which also saw similar favorable comparable leasing spreads on a cash and GAAP basis.
In addition to the redevelopment of One Beach in San Francisco and the development of Tower 3 at La Jolla Commons in San Diego, we are underway on the following projects: major renovations at Eastgate Office Park; new amenities at City Center Bellevue, including a fitness center and bike club with showers and lockers and a conference center; renovations and common area enhancements at Solana Crossing; a new fitness center at Corporate Campus East III; new amenities at First & Main and Lloyd Center Tower in Portland, including a fitness center, conference center and lounge at each building.
In Portland, net effective rents for new multifamily leases are now back near pre-COVID levels and 18% higher year-over-year compared to the third quarter of 2019 and 2021, respectively.
Our interest coverage and fixed charge coverage ratio ended the quarter at 4.1x.
Our objective is to achieve and maintain a net debt to EBITDA of 5.5x or below.
Meanwhile, since Labor Day, we have seen incremental progress of return to work in our office portfolio from Q2 to Q3, with strength in San Diego and Portland and fairly strong utilization at Landmark in San Francisco by our 2 office tenants at about 75% Tuesday through Thursday and 50% Monday and Friday, as this building serves as a hub for one tenant in San Francisco and as the other's headquarter.
Additionally, in San Diego, net effective rents for new multifamily leases are now 22% above pre-COVID levels and 16% higher year-over-year compared to the third quarter of 2019 and 2021, respectively.
In Q3, we saw vacant units at Hassalo leased at an average of approximately 21% over prior rents and renewal units leased at an average of approximately 8% over prior rates in all cases with no concessions given during Q3.
Same-store cash NOI in Q3 '22 ended at approximately 11.3% growth year-over-year for the third quarter.