GAAP net loss for the third quarter was $205 million or $0.88 per share.
On an earnings available for distribution basis, net income for the third quarter was $63 million or $0.27 per share.
GAAP book value at the end of third quarter was $7.44 per share, and our economic return on GAAP book value was negative 13% based on the quarterly change in book value and the third quarter dividend per common share.
Given the market outlook for higher rates for an extended period, we entered a $500 million 2-year and a $385 million 5-year interest rate swap.
In total, we committed to purchase $753 million loans in the third quarter.
These swaps complement the $1 billion swaption we entered in Q2 so that we may partially hedge our borrowing cost over a longer period.
We expect to close $476 million loans into a long-term non-mark-to-market structure, which we anticipate will generate double-digit returns.
We Additionally, we purchased and settled on $66 million of business purpose loans during the third quarter of 2022.
As of the end of the quarter, 96% of our capital was allocated to residential credit assets.
We retained subordinated notes and certain interest-only securities with an aggregate balance of approximately $86 million.
As a result, the Federal Reserve raised interest rates 75 basis points at each of their July and September meetings, bringing total tightening of short-term interest rates to 300 basis points over the first 9 months of this year.
As reported in September, sales of existing homes declined for 8 consecutive months to the lowest level in the past decade.
As of the end of the quarter, securitized debt represented 72% of our total financing with an average cost of 2.7% and 98% of our securitized debt is fixed rate.
And post quarter end, we ended October with approximately $350 million of cash on our balance sheet, entered an additional $1.1 billion of pay-fixed interest rate swaps.
Inflation, which Federal Reserve officials have believed to be transitory in nature last year has turned out to be persistent with the consumer price index reaching 8.3% on a year-over-year basis in September.
Largely because of securitization this quarter, we reduced our overall recourse financing by $328 million.