Turning to our third quarter results, all on a fully diluted basis, net income per share was $0.01.
And finally, turning to our earnings guidance, in connection with the announced disposition and the changing reality in the capital markets, we are revising our FFO guidance per share on a fully diluted basis to a range of $1.26 to $1.28.
FFO per share was $0.32 and FFO as adjusted per share was also $0.32.
At quarter end, the company had total indebtedness of approximately $1.4 billion, representing a net debt to annualized quarterly pro forma EBITDA ratio of 7.4x, with approximately $177.8 million outstanding on our line of credit.
We continue to expect the remainder of the assets in the VA portfolio to deliver as planned, and we expect the JV to close on a total of approximately $145 million of this portfolio in 2022.
This guidance is predicated upon a number of factors, including no additional fully owned acquisition activity beyond the approximately $107.7 million already completed year-to-date, the closing of properties in the VA portfolio totaling approximately $145 million at the company's pro rata share, the completed sale of all 10 properties in the disposition portfolio, and no additional material development-related investment in 2022.
We have renewed our largest 2022 lease expirations for a weighted average duration of 19.3 years, providing the company with increased certainty and duration of cash flow for future dividends.
When combined with the approximately $92.5 million of unsettled forward equity, these actions translate into a well-positioned balance sheet for the company and the time of rising rates.
As of September 30, we own 95 operating properties, comprising approximately 9.1 million leased square feet, either wholly owned or through our joint venture with a weighted average age of 14 years and a weighted average remaining lease term of 10.1 years.
A commitment to increase DEI hiring and training practices across the company, 90% participation in charitable giving or volunteering by 2025 and finally, implementation of an employee engagement survey with at least 90% participation for Easterly employees.
Interest rates are rising this year at a pace this country is not seen in nearly 2 decades.
With the completed sale of the 10-Property disposition portfolio subsequent to quarter end, we expect net proceeds will be used to pay down outstanding debt obligations, taking Easterly's adjusted net debt to annualized quarterly pro forma EBITDA ratio down to 6.9x as of September 30.
Like nearly all of the properties in this VA portfolio, VA Columbus sits on a brand-new 20-year lease that does not expire until 2042.
Starting with acquisitions during the third quarter, Easterly acquired a 28,900 square foot U.S. District Courthouse located in Council Bluffs, Iowa.
With a combined weighted average renewal term of 19 years, the importance of these 2 facilities for the U.S. government is apparent.
The disposition portfolio is comprised of 10 buildings, approximately 668,000 leased square feet with a weighted average age of 14 years as of quarter end.