With successful leasing year-to-date, rising rental rates and asset recycling, the company was able to maintain core FFO of $0.50 per diluted share, consistent with the third quarter of 2021.
We are narrowing our 2022 annual core FFO guidance per share to between $1.99 to $2.01 per diluted share.
Now including additional interest expense incurred during the current quarter, driven by rising interest rates as well as interest expense from additional debt associated with the 11 80 Peachtree acquisition.
We anticipate ultimately funding the 1180 acquisition using sale proceeds generated from noncore asset dispositions.
And after quarter end, we have agreed to terms for the disposition of our 2 assets in Cambridge, Massachusetts to 2 separate buyers.
Also, we completed a very strategic acquisition and laid the groundwork for 2 important dispositions.
I will note, our leasing economics were very favorable with approximately 33% and 38% roll-up or increase in rents for the quarter on a cash and accrual basis, respectively.
Our monetization efforts at Creston Ridge are paying off, having completed 4 new lease transactions in the past few quarters and a robust pipeline that should stabilize occupancy there soon.
With only a few leases expiring for the remainder of the year, we expect positive net space absorption in the fourth quarter, resulting in an anticipated year-end lease percentage around 87%.
Coming to Dallas, we're happy to announce the extension of the entire Ryan lease at our lead certified 3 Galleria office tower.
As we disclosed on last quarter's call, we entered into a binding contract to purchase 1180 Peach tree Street in the heart of Midtown Atlanta for a purchase price of approximately $465 million, including the assumption of an approximately $200 million, 4.1% fixed rate secured mortgage, which matures in 2028.
We have approximately 2 million square feet of outstanding proposals, which is in line with the past 4 quarters.
We -- the FFO generated during the third quarter was approximately $43 million, which is well above our current $26 million quarterly dividend level.
Our weighted average lease term at the end of the third quarter is approximately 6 years.
Our lease percentage at the end of the third quarter was approximately 87%, up 150 basis points from year-end and largely unchanged from the close of the previous quarter.
Additionally, expirations are low next year with only 1 lease larger than 100,000 square feet that will not expire until December of 2023.