Q3 revenue was $1.8 billion, down 17%, in line with our transaction volume decline.
We delivered $1.8 billion in revenue.
Our Q3 transaction volume was down 17%, consistent with our down 10% to 20% estimate.
based off what we're seeing in the market today, including our September and October open contracts, we're seeing more like over 25% volume reductions driven by lower unit sales, and recent third-party forecasts predict lower 2023 volume, driven by a decline in unit sales versus their 2022 forecast.
In Q3, our volume was down 17%, consistent with our down 10% to 20% estimate.
Our luxury leadership position was one of the more important drivers of that difference as we consistently saw less decline in the 750 and up the segment of the market in both our transactions and in our listings.
So to start, we really like our franchise results and how we're leveraging the better competitive environment to outperform 2021 on 2 critical metrics.
Our transaction volume was down 17% year-over-year, consistent with the range we estimated during Q2 earnings.
Second, we are seeing pretty meaningful geographic variation with about 25% volume declines in the west, but only kind of high single-digit declines in places like the Midwest and the Northeast.
We are running ahead of last year's numbers, including our Corken franchise expanding into its 50th market since launching 2 years ago.
We are on track to realize the entire amount this year, plus incremental new actions, which increased our full-year 2022 savings target to over $150 million.
Now the macroeconomic drivers of this falloff in housing activity are not a mystery, with mortgage rates more than doubling to now at or above 7%, affordability challenges given the rise in home prices, and economic uncertainty anchored in high inflation.
While average days on the market stayed flat in the Northeast but increased by 11 days in the West.
2 have trial dates set in the next 6 months.
We earned $166 million of operating EBITDA in the quarter.
So taking Cobalt banker as an example, average days on the market in Q3 increased 5% versus the prior year to 20 days overall.