Starting with the quarter, we had another strong quarter with earnings of $0.28 coming in ahead of our expectations.
As highlighted on our release, we increased our 2022 guidance for FFO before special items to $1.28 to $1.30, which at the midpoint represents you-over-your FFO growth of about 17%.
Same store NOI growth for the quarter came in stronger than forecasted at 5.4%.
Before we begin, please be aware that statements made during the call that are not historical may be deemed forward looking statements within the meaning of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, and actual results may differ materially from those indicated by such forward looking statements.
Secondly, the GAAP accounting rules governing impairment require consideration of an individual investment capital structure or more specifically as it relates to these 3 investments.
Thus, for modeling purposes we anticipate that our pro rata share of non-cash GAAP adjustments to be in the $7 million to $9 million range for 2023.
As outlined in our release, we took a non-cash GAAP impairment charge on 3 investments during the quarter.
The factors leading to these write-downs were very nuanced and isolated to these 3 individual investments.
Lastly, given the ongoing and profitable monetization of fund assets, fund fee income is expected to decline slightly in 2023 to $14 million to $16 million from the approximately $18 million that we expect in the current year, which we anticipate will be more than offset by increases in our promote and transactional income in 2023.
Furthermore, over the next 18 months or so, we anticipate generating $150 million to $200 million of proceeds from a variety of sources, including retained cash flow from the REIT, repayments from our lending book, the continued monetization of fund assets, including all of our portion of our Albertson's investment, along with the possibility for a handful of strategic core asset dispositions.
And we are on track to exceed our initial 4% to 6% full year same store guidance.
And consistent with our updated expectation of above 6% same store NOI growth in 2022, we anticipate that the NOI generated from our core portfolio will exceed the high end of our initial guidance.
We are slated to add $30 million to $40 million of NOI to our core portfolio over the next three to five years.
And as we start thinking about 2023, we continue to anticipate 5% to 10% pro rata core NOI growth after excluding the non-recurring impact from 2022 cash recoveries and before factoring in the growth from City Point.
In terms of future funding and capital allocation, the projected cost to fund the $30 million to $40 million of projected core NOI growth over the next several years is about $100 million, and we expect to self-fund these costs.
In summary, while I've thrown out a lot of data, the key takeaway from this update is the continued strength we are seeing in our business along with the opportunity for extraordinary NOI growth over the next 3 to 5 years.