That being said, we are excited about the progress against our 5 growth pillars, positive signals from our test markets and planned product launches in 2023.
IMT segment revenue was $457 million, down 5% year-over-year and above the high end of our outlook range, driven by better-than-expected performance in Premier Agent and growth in rentals.
12 months later, we feel we made the right decision to wind down our iBuying operations, particularly given how this year has played out.
We expect Mortgages segment EBITDA to be between a loss of $36 million and a loss of $31 million, given we are holding our investment levels relatively flat from Q3 as we experienced macro and seasonal pressures in revenue.
Of note, our IMT segment EBITDA for the quarter came in at $164 million, which was $43 million higher than the high end of our guidance range.
We believe the strategic investments we are making in our 5 growth pillars will allow us to better serve more customers and, in turn, drive more transactions and more revenue per transaction.
We expect Mortgages segment revenue to be between $15 million and $20 million in Q4, which is down sequentially from Q3.
We ended the quarter with $3.5 billion of cash and investments on the balance sheet, flat from Q2, which includes the benefit from operating cash flow from continuing operations, the full wind-down of iBuyer inventory as well as the impact of $176 million in share repurchases during Q3.
Having led Expedia through 9/11, Zillow through the financial crisis in 2008 and early COVID in 2020, we have experience staying relatively steady on the gas when others are slamming on the brakes.
Within the IMT segment, we expect Premier Agent revenue to be between $250 million to $270 million, down 27% year-over-year at the midpoint of the outlook range, relatively in line with our expectations for industry performance in Q4.
From there, we have 4 key areas that we have to execute on from now through 2023 to start to capture share.
IMT segment EBITDA margin was 36%, demonstrating the incremental margin leverage our core business exhibits when revenues grow beyond our expectations, with much of that revenue flowing directly to profit for us.
Mortgages segment revenue of $26 million was near the high end of our outlook range.
We've seen 30-year mortgage rates spike over the last few months to more than 7%, a level that hasn't been reached in 20 years.
Premier Agent revenue decreased 13% year-over-year and outperformed both our expectations and our estimated industry decline of 15%.
While the housing market is challenged right now, if long-term average turnover rates persist, we would expect that 60 million homes will trade hands over the next 10 years, and that's the basis of the long-term opportunity in front of us.