As such, FFO on a per unit basis posted a growth rate of 15% to $0.31 in the third quarter of this year versus $0.27 in the third quarter of last year.
Regarding the latter, Q3 2022 funds from operations of $66.6 million increased by 13% from $59 million in the prior year.
All other capital expenditures, including revenue sustaining, revenue enhancing and recoverable CapEx should be in the $65 million to $75 million range.
On the same basis, this drove the per unit results to $0.88 cumulatively for the year, up $0.10 per unit also equating to 12% growth.
Growth during the third quarter was $0.08 per square foot and on a year-over-year basis, it was $0.56 per square foot or 2.5%.
We were also clear that subject to the duration and ultimate economic impact of the pandemic, the Board believed the reduction would be in place for a period spanning approximately 2 years.
It was also a quarter where we initiated and successfully launched our $1 billion enhanced capital allocation and portfolio optimization plan.
Demolition of the existing structures on our 138 Yorkville development site is now complete, and we expect to commence shoring and excavation later this month.
FCR's weighted average unit count during the third quarter was 216 million units, due principally to activity under the REIT's normal course issuer repurchase program, the unit count was 5 million units or 2% lower in Q3 versus the prior year.
This was a decrease of $0.99 per unit or approximately 4% relative to June 30, and it places our net asset value approximately 3% lower from the beginning of the year.
Higher base rents from new and renewal leasing and higher contributions from variable revenue sources were the 2 most significant drivers of NOI growth.
Our plan includes the monetization of more than $1 billion of low or no yielding assets over the next 2 years.
Specifically, at least $400 million to repay debt with the balance allocated to both our NCIB and expected development investments through the end of 2024.
This contributed to solid same-property NOI growth of 5.3% or 3.4% without bad debts and lease termination fees for those who prefer to exclude them.
It is also the result of the strategic decisions that we made, including the sale of $1.5 billion of specific assets from 2019 to 2021, most of which were sold either because we chose to exit secondary markets or sold properties in which we felt we had maximized their value and chose to reallocate that capital to more productive uses.
Selling the property at a sub 3% cap rate and an attractive premium to IFRS NAV affords us the opportunity to reinvest that capital in significantly higher return endeavors, which today includes our NCIB.