As George mentioned, we are increasing our guidance for full year 2022 AFFO per share to be in the range of $1.08 to $1.12.
AFFO per share was $0.29, an increase of 7.4% compared to prior year.
As a result of the progress we have made in our operations, combined with the recovering global food supply chain, we are increasing our full year 2022 AFFO per share guidance to the range of $1.08 to $1.12.
We have provided detail around the building blocks, but let me comment on this implied fourth quarter range as it relates to fourth quarter 2021 AFFO per share of $0.31, which is a challenging comp due to the low NOI line items, even though we are increasing full year 2022 guidance.
For the full year, we are increasing our AFFO per share guidance range to $1.08 to $1.12.
For the third quarter, we are pleased to report total company revenue and NOI growth of 7% and 16%, respectively, driven by our warehouse business.
For the third quarter, rent and storage revenue per economic occupied pallet in our same store on a constant currency basis increased by 8.1% versus the prior year's quarter.
At quarter end, total debt outstanding was $3.2 billion.
Turning to our 4 near-term priorities.
In short, we are a better operating company today than we were 1 year ago.
During the quarter, we closed on the upsize and extension of our new $2 billion sustainability-linked senior unsecured credit facilities.
For the full year, we are now expecting constant currency revenue growth in the same store to be in the range of 7.5% to 8%.
We have made good progress on our 4 near-term priorities.
Compared to 2019, a pre-COVID year, we were approximately 33 percentage points higher.
This performance was principally driven by our Global Warehouse same-store pool, which generated total revenue growth of 9.6% and NOI growth of 14.4%, both on a constant currency basis.
After a strategic review of this part of our business, we have made the decision to exit a relationship with a national retailer for whom we manage 4 facilities and have no ownership in the land, buildings, equipment or any other assets.