We recorded a GAAP loss of $0.33 per share and a loss of $0.03 of core earnings per share while maintaining our common dividend of $0.21 per share.
Despite this, during the quarter, our adjusted book value per share declined 4.2% from $11.15 to $10.68, predominantly due to widening of credit spreads and securitization markets.
During the quarter, net interest income exceeded our hedge and operating expenses, generating earnings of $4.9 million or $0.22 per share.
Arc Home generated an after-tax loss to MITT of $1.3 million or $0.06 per share driven by reduced volumes and lower gain-on-sale margins.
During the third quarter, book value declined by approximately 4% as a result of recording a GAAP net loss available to common shareholders of approximately $7.5 million or $0.33 per fully diluted share.
Despite meaningfully lower expected forward origination volumes, we expect to source new credits around an 8% yield with equity returns in the middle to high teens while on warehouse.
We believe that the combination of these 2 profiles provide stable cash flows along with mark-to-market upside and limited exposure to recourse leverage.
Arc Home's gain on the sale of loans sold to MITT approximated $1.8 million or $0.08 per share this quarter, which you can also see are excluded from core earnings.
The first 2 transactions we marketed and priced in August when market conditions were more favorable.
This was offset by a $0.25 loss contributed to core earnings from our investment in Arc Home, bringing core to a $0.03 loss overall for the quarter.
Turning to Page 10.
In the relatively short period of time between these transactions, AAA spreads widened out nearly 100 basis points, while risk-free nominal yields increased over 100 basis points.
We issued 3 transactions totaling just under $1.3 billion.
As you may recall, we fully utilized the remaining capacity on our previous repurchase program and authorized a new program in August with a capacity of 15 million.
Based on our early preliminary read, book value is down approximately 5% to 6% for the month of October.
Turning to Page 7.