And adjusted earnings were $28.5 million or $0.33 per diluted common share.
When adjusting for SAFE mark-to-market value and our estimate of the incremental unaccrued iPIP amounts, our common equity per share as adjusted, is approximately $1 billion or $12.33 per share.
Additionally, we continue to streamline our balance sheet by extinguishing debt and ended the quarter with approximately $1.3 billion of cash on hand.
At quarter end, we had approximately $1.7 billion of total outstanding debt with a weighted average maturity of 3.2 years.
As you can see on the slide, we have provided a sensitivity analysis on this adjusted common equity value per share metric should SAFE's stock price go up or down by $10 from here.
On the right side of the balance sheet, we had $1.7 billion of remaining debt, $305 million of preferred equity and $144 million of other liabilities and noncontrolling interests, including the accrued balance of iPIP, leaving us with common equity of $1.4 billion.
UCA continued to grow and now exceeds $10 billion.
Safehold closed on $280 million in new ground leases on a half a dozen high-quality multifamily assets, giving customers a clear capital advantage and helping them execute their business plan.
Separately, as we previously announced, MSD Partners has committed to purchasing Caret at a $2 billion valuation, which is a substantial mark for the underappreciated asset and should serve as a good data point as we continue to seek to unlock Caret's value for shareholders.
Of note, during the quarter, we negotiated with certain holders of our convertible notes, on an early redemption of $81 million of those notes in exchange for 3.3 million shares of iStar common stock and $43 million of cash.
And you can see that reflected on the left side of the slide as the market value has fallen to $1.2 billion, which is below our carrying value.
On Slide 7, we detail our investments in the ground lease ecosystem: As we previously discussed, iStar has 2 separate funds centered on investing in the ground lease ecosystem which enables us to pursue additional ground lease opportunities.
Safehold ended the quarter with more than $750 million of liquidity for future investments.
During the third quarter, iStar extinguished a total of $155 million of debt, including $93 million of convertible notes and $62 million of open market purchases of our bonds at a price close to par.
These transactions resulted in a $12 million -- in $12 million of noncash losses on early extinguishment of debt during the quarter, which also resulted in a net increase to equity of $38 million.
During the third quarter, based on milestones being met, iStar sold 1 ground lease asset to Safehold for $36 million from its ground leases portfolio.