We reported core FFO of $4.13 for the quarter, representing 20.8% growth over the third quarter of 2021.
In the same-store, our revenue increased 14.7%.
As Joe mentioned, we raised our core FFO outlook for the year by $0.20 at the midpoint, or 1.3%, to $15.55 from our most recent outlook.
I will highlight our view of 2022 as we head into the last 2 months of the year, and then Tom will cover more specifics in the quarter.
The strong 14.7% growth moderated slightly from last quarter's 15.9% growth as expected.
In total, core FFO is set to grow by over 20% for the second consecutive year.
Our leverage of 3.3x net debt and preferred to EBITDA, combined with $900 million of cash on hand at quarter end, puts us in a very strong position heading into 2023.
That said, Los Angeles was again a particularly strong contributor, accelerating from 17% same-store revenue growth in the second quarter to 20% in the third quarter.
Same-store direct cost of operations were up 7.8% in the quarter.
These include the industry-leading 200 million square foot portfolio of well-located assets in every large scale market nationally; the most recognized brand in the self-storage industry; cost-efficient online marketing prowess to guide new customers to our platform; a broad and growing base of digital channels to source new customers while improving customer and employee satisfaction; historically high operating margins now above 80% and operational efficiency; a massive non-same-store portfolio which continues to grow through acquisitions and development that is now 50 million square feet, with excellent earnings power with over $150 million of additional NOI to come; a well-primed low-leverage and low-risk balance sheet with $900 million of cash and no debt expirations through 2023; and finally, the most experienced team in the self-storage sector.
And breaking down the components, realized rents per occupied square foot were up a strong 17.2%, matching last quarter's performance.
Weighted average occupancy declined 2.4%.
We have a well-laddered long-term debt profile with limited floating rate exposure and over $4 billion of preferred stock with perpetual fixed distributions.
And I note the recent Inflation Reduction Act added incentives for further solar investments as we ramp our own activity to reach over 1,000 properties with solar on our roots in the coming years.
The moderation in occupancy from June to September represented a return to typical pre-pandemic seasonal occupancy decline of 150 basis points.
In total, net operating income for the same-store pool was up 17% for the quarter.