Adjusted diluted earnings per share was $0.21 compared to $0.98 a year ago.
As you can see on slide seven, net interest income of $373 million declined $26 million from the prior quarter.
We were very pleased with the fundamentals of our core performance including period end loan growth of $1.1 billion, deposit growth of $1.4 billion and core transaction deposit growth of more than $600 million.
However, the core net interest margin declined 5 basis points from the prior quarter, slightly more than our original expectations due to the more significant reduction in interest rates.
Adjusted non-interest revenue of $99 million grew $7 million from fourth quarter benefiting from significant activity in mortgage, capital markets and fiduciary businesses.
In this easing cycle, the FOMC cut their target rate by 225 basis points and our general expectation is for cycle betas to end in the low to mid 30s as deposits repriced throughout the year.
With the increased level of COVID related expenses, which we currently estimate of $5 million to $6 million in the second quarter we expect adjusted expenses to remain relatively stable quarter-on-quarter before declining in the second half of the year.
The core net interest margin, which excludes PAA decreased 5 basis points from the prior quarter to 3.35%.
On slide eight, you will see that we have had continued success in fee revenue generation, which increased to $99 million adjusted.
Excluding those impacts, we reiterate that we expect the margin to decline 4 basis points to 5 basis points per 25 basis point decrease.
Since the launch of P3 on April 3, our team has processed, approved and funded more than $2 billion in loans for 8,300 customers.
Adjusted non-interest expense totaled $271 million for the quarter, up $6 million versus the previous quarter, largely due to the $5 million increase in seasonal payroll taxes that were referenced during our fourth quarter earnings call.
Adjusted expenses increased $6 million from the prior quarter, generally in line with our prior guidance.
That's an increase of $7 million from the prior quarter and up $21 million or 27% versus the prior year.
Among other actions our shareholders overwhelmingly approved the elimination of our 10 -1 voting structure and super majority voting requirements.
The majority of that decline or $25 million was attributable to the expected decline in purchase accounting adjustments.