20.53 Net sales per hectoliter on a brand volume basis increased 1.8% in constant currency as the net pricing growth more than offset the negative mix effects in Canada and Europe.
Consolidated net sales revenue decreased 11.1% in constant currency, principally due to lower financial volumes, which declined 12% while brand volumes declined 9.1%.
We also continue to anticipate underlying depreciation and amortization of $800 million, net interest expense of $270 million plus or minus 5% and an effective tax rate in the range of 20% to 23%.
Net debt was $7.7 billion, down $1.1 billion from March 31, 2020 and we ended the first quarter with a strong borrowing capacity with no outstanding balance on our $1.5 billion U.S. credit facility as of March 31, 2021.
And Coors Banquet posted its best quarterly volume performance in over 4 years in the United States.
In the U.S. brand volumes decreased 7.3% compared to domestic shipment declines of 9.5%, driven by the economy and premium segments.
Driven by our commitment to maintaining any time upgrading our investment grade rating, we expect to continue to pay down debt and reaffirm our target net debt to underlying EBITDA ratio of approximately 3.25 times by the end of 2021, and below 3 times by the end of 2022.
And we had a strong Q1 in Panama, with over a 50% increase in brand volumes with Coors Light's explosive triple-digit growth leading the way.
Canada brand volumes declined 10.8% primarily due to the on-premise closures, while Latin America brand volumes grew 10.8%.
Europe net sales revenue was down 39.5% in constant currency driven by volume declines and negative geographic and channel mix due to on-premise restrictions most meaningfully in the UK, given the on-premise lockdown for the full quarter.
Net sales per hectoliter on a brand volume basis declined 10.4% driven by unfavorable geographic channel and brand mix, particularly from our higher margin on-premise focused UK business, partially offset by positive pricing.
In a single week, Topo Chico Hard Seltzer jumped to 3.2 share U.S. hard seltzer category, despite only launching in 16 markets.
Underlying COGS per hectoliter increased 5.6% on a constant currency basis, driven by cost inflation and volume deleverage partially offset by cost savings.
Europe financial volumes decreased 22% and brand volumes decreased 17% driven by a significant decline in brand volumes in the UK.
Right now, we are shipping, over 1 million barrels a week in the United States for the first time in nearly a year.
Underlying free cash flow was a use of $271 million for the quarter, an increase in cash use of $54 million from the prior year period driven by lower underlying EBITDA and unfavorable working capital, driven by the timing of payments related to lower volumes, higher non-income tax deferrals due to governmental programs related to the Coronavirus pandemic and incentive payments partially offset by lower capex spend.