In the first quarter, we reported consolidated adjusted net income of 11 million, or $0.11 per share, up from 3 million, or $0.03 per share in the prior quarter.
Lastly, Teekay Tankers recorded an adjusted net loss of $22 million or, $0.65 per share, which is an improvement of $19 million, or $0.56 per share compared to last quarter.
The partnership generated adjusted net income of $60 million, or $0.61 per unit, which is slightly better than the prior quarter.
We also generated total adjusted EBITDA of 202 million, up slightly from the previous quarter.
As a reminder, the unit has been operating under a bareboat contract at a nominal day rate since we received an upfront cash payment of $67 million in April 2020.
The partnership's LNG fleet is now 98% fixed for the remainder of 2021 and 89% fixed for 2022.
Separately, in April, we entered into a conditional agreement with CNR, whereby the customer will take over our remaining Phase 2 decommissioning responsibilities on the Banff field, which, when finalized, will effectively conclude and eliminate our remaining obligations related to the Banff field after over 20 years of successful operations.
As such, in Q2, we expect to incur approximately $5 million to $6 million of costs relating to the towage and initial milestone payments to the recycling yard, which represents the most part of our remaining cost associated with the unit, with only minimal cost expected to be incurred after Q2.
In addition, we continue to see a strong correlation between global vaccination programs and the increase in oil demand, which we estimate to be approximately 5% lower currently compared to the pre-pandemic levels.
However, the current level of oil production is stable at approximately 4,000 barrels per day, and oil prices are more than double the level that we experienced at this time one year ago.
regulatory authorities that Teekay has completed all of its obligations in relation to Phase 1 of the decommissioning project.
As highlighted last quarter, we have successfully completed Phase 1 of our decommissioning project with net costs below budget.
Lastly, Teekay LNG recently increased its quarterly common unit distribution by 15% to $1.15 per unit per annum.
This distribution level, which is supported by a large and diversified portfolio of long-term contracts, enables Teekay LNG to continue delevering its balance sheet, which provides financial flexibility to optimally allocate capital as the global demand for LNG continues to grow while adding $6 million per year to TK parent's free cash flow for a total of $43 million per year in cash distributions from TGP.