Total WWE revenue was $263.5 million, a decline of 9% due to the cancellation of live events, including a large scale international event and the associated loss of merchandise sales, all due to COVID-19.
Last quarter, WWE issued guidance for 2021 adjusted OIBDA of $270 million to $305 million.
In the case of the NHL, linear ratings are down about 25%.
On USA Network, the following Night Raw delivered its best performance in the 18 to 49 demo in over a year and NXT's debut on its New Night on Tuesday was up 29% in the 18 to 49 demo year-over-year.
Accordingly, WWE estimates debt capacity under the revolving line of credit of $200 million.
WWE sales and sponsorship revenue increased 19%, excluding the loss of a large scale international event.
For 2021, we've estimated total capital expenditures of $65 million to $85 million to begin construction, as well as to enhance WWE's technology infrastructure.
Looking at the WWE media segment, adjusted OIBDA was $107 million, growing 4% as increased revenue and profit from WWE's licensing agreement with Peacock, as well as increased revenue from the escalation of domestic core content rights fees more than offset the absence of a large scale international event.
The NFL saw a media rights increase of 79% even as linear ratings went down a little bit in recent season.
Despite this decline, adjusted OIBDA grew 9% to $83.9 million, reflecting the upfront recognition related to WWE's licensing agreement and the decline in operating expenses that resulted from the absence of live events.
Video views during WrestleMania week across digital and social platforms, including YouTube, Facebook and Instagram, hit 1.1 billion and 32 million hours of content were consumed, representing a 14% and 9% increase, respectively.
From that time to the end of this quarter, Raw ratings have held steady and SmackDown ratings increased 9%.
In the first quarter, WWE generated approximately $54 million in free cash flow, which was down slightly.
Digital consumption increased 7% to 367 million hours.
WWE's flagship YouTube channel crossed 75 million subscribers and is now the fourth most viewed YouTube channel in the world.
As Vince, Nick and Stephanie highlighted, transitioning WWE Network to Peacock, while launching WrestleMania with a live audience of 50,000 fans in attendance is a major accomplishment.