In our Timberlands business, we expect third quarter earnings and adjusted EBITDA will be approximately $25 million lower than second quarter.
Their collective efforts delivered the company's strongest quarterly adjusted EBITDA on record at $1.6 billion, surpassing last quarter's record by 43%.
We ended the quarter with approximately $1.8 billion of cash and just under $5.3 billion of debt.
Our year-to-date adjusted EBITDA is almost $2 billion higher than the first half of 2020.
We expect third quarter adjusted EBITDA will be comparable to the third quarter 2020, but earnings will be approximately $20 million higher than one year ago due to a lower average land basis on the mix of properties sold.
Earnings and adjusted EBITDA decreased by approximately 5% compared with the first quarter due to timing of real estate sales and mix of properties sold, but were significantly higher than the year ago quarter.
In the third quarter, we will record a cash inflow of $261 million and a gain of approximately $30 million related to this transaction.
Looking forward, key outlook items for the third quarter and full year 2021 are presented on Pages 17 and 18.
As a result, we are increasing our guidance for full year 2021 adjusted EBITDA to $290 million.
Turning to real estate, energy and natural resources on Pages nine and 10.
We generated over $1.3 billion of cash from operations in the second quarter and over $2 billion year-to-date.
Wood Products earnings and adjusted EBITDA improved by almost $0.5 billion compared with the prior quarter.
Wood Products delivered another record quarter at $1.4 billion of adjusted EBITDA, surpassing last quarter's record by 56%.
Single-family starts in June reached their highest monthly level since May of 2007.
In Distribution, adjusted EBITDA increased $36 million compared to the first quarter, a 92% improvement as strong demand drove higher sales volumes for most products and the business captured improved margins.
I'll begin with our key financial items, which are summarized on Page 15.