we currently expect total revenues in the range of $num-one billion to $num-two billion.
annual non-gaap earnings per share was $num-one in year-five, an increase of num-two% compared to $num-three for prior year year-four.
for the full year year-five, consolidated revenues were $num-one billion, a decline of num-two% compared to the full year year-four.
adjusted ebitda is expected to be in the range of $num-one million to $num-two million, representing an increase in the midpoint of our outlook as compared to the preliminary outlook we provided in november.
diluted earnings per share on a non-gaap basis for the quarter increased num-one% to $num-two versus $num-three in the prior year quarter, primarily due to the continuing strength of customer payment activity and reduced lease merchandise write-offs.
in the fourth quarter of year-five, same-store revenues rose num-one% as compared to the prior year quarter, primarily due to strong customer payment activity, improving lease portfolio size and higher retail sales.
revenues were $num-one million, a decrease of approximately num-two% compared to the same quarter last year, despite the closure, consolidation and acquisition of a net num-three company-owned locations throughout the year.
despite the significant increase in traffic at aarons.com, e-commerce recurring revenue written into the portfolio declined num-one% as compared to last year's fourth quarter, due to both decisioning optimization and lower conversion of traffic.
this decline is primarily the result of a reduction of num-one company-operated stores in year-four and year-five partially offset by a num-two% increase in same-store revenues for the year.
adjusted ebitda for the full year year-five was $num-one million, an increase of $num-two million or num-three% compared to the full year of year-four.
as of the end of the year, we had num-one gennext stores opened and have more than num-two additional stores in the year-six pipeline.
in addition, concurrent with completing the spin-off transaction of november num-txth, the company entered into a $num-one million unsecured revolving credit facility, which was undrawn at the end of year-five, giving the company more than $num-two million of liquidity as of year-end.
free cash flows, which we define as operating cash flows of less capital expenditures, are expected to be $num-one million to $num-two million.
recall that our implementation of decisioning technology in the second quarter of year-five effectively reduced new lease originations and therefore, revenue written by num-one% to num-two%.
write-offs in the fourth quarter were num-one%, down num-two basis points from the prior year fourth quarter, due primarily to the implementation of our new decisioning technology, improved operations and the benefit of government stimulus.
operating expenses were down $num-one million as compared to the fourth quarter of year-four, primarily due to an $num-two million reduction in write-offs, offset primarily by an increase in advertising spend and the previously mentioned benefit of real estate transactions that took place in the fourth quarter of the prior year.