last night we reported first quarter year-six ffo per share of $num-one, first quarter year-six net income attributable to common stockholders per share of $num-two.
without the charge for the early extinguishment of debt, our first quarter year-six ffo per share would have been approximately $num-one.
based on the current environment same-store metrics are down in retail as expected and office was also lower for the quarter, but it is expected to end with num-one% or greater same-store cash noi for the year ended year-six.
finally, i want to mention that the board of directors has approved a quarterly dividend of $num-one a share for the first quarter, consistent with our previous dividend, which is, we believe is supported by our collection efforts in the first quarter.
as we've worked our way through these past num-one months, however, we realized that it is the resiliency of our properties and our company's employees that has enabled us to weather this storm.
to date we have leased approximately num-one% of those expiring units and expect to have the majority of them released by the end of summer.
today, we have avoided any material impact from retailer bankruptcy having lost only num-one square feet in the aggregate out of our over num-two million square foot retail portfolio, which we believe is a testament to us having superior locations at these restructured tenants want to remain in.
i believe it is important to note that the ffo in the first quarter includes a charge of approximately $num-one million for the early extinguishment of our $num-two million senior guaranteed notes, series a, which were due on [date], year-six.
we expect this collection trend to continue to improve going forward with april at approximately num-one% to date.
our collections have continued to improve each quarter since the pandemic began and improved each month in qtr-one with the collection rate north of num-one% for the first quarter.
we are feeling more bullish than at any time over the past num-one months, now that the vaccine is widely available, the covid governmental restrictions in our coastal markets have lightened considerably and we are seeing firsthand the consumer behavior has begun reverting closer to pre-pandemic levels.
our top num-one office tenants represented num-two% of our total office base rent.
current status by region are as follows: bellevue is num-one% leased; portland is num-two% leased; san francisco is num-three% leased, net of one beach; and san diego is num-four% leased with two buildings under renovation at torrey reserve making up num-five% of san diego's vacancy and num-six% of the office portfolio's vacancy.
furthermore, the num-one unit master lease with the private university in our san diego multifamily portfolio expires at the end of may and our san diego multifamily team led by abigail rex is fully engaged on additional marketing and advertising campaigns to entice students to remain in expiring units and to attract new prospects.
furthermore, we had approximately $num-one of deferred rent due from about num-two tenants in qtr-one based on covid related lease modifications entered into in year-five and we have collected approximately num-three% of those deferred amount, we believe this further validates our strategy of supporting our struggling retailers through the government mandated closure.
at the end of the first quarter, net of one beach, which is under redevelopment, our office portfolio stood at approximately num-one% leased, with just num-two% expiring through the end of year-six.