last night, we reported fourth quarter and year ended year-five ffo per share of $num-one and $num-two respectively, and fourth quarter and year ended year-five net income attributable to common stockholders per share of $num-three and $num-four respectively.
also in qtr-one year-six through qtr-four year-six, the additional proceeds from the public bond offering are expected to increase our interest expense by approximately $num-one per quarter.
the total collections to-date of approximately num-one% in qtr-four versus num-two% in qtr-three and num-three% in qtr-two.
january is currently trending consistent with qtr-four, just over num-one% to-date, and likely to increase further, all despite the headwinds of governor newsom shutdown restrictions in california that lasted through most of december and january.
adjustments that also would need to be made include, in qtr-one year-six, approximately $num-one related to the yield maintenance make whole payment on the series a note prepayment will be a non-recurring expense in qtr-one year-six.
first, we expect to see the embassy suites waikiki coming back in full strength in year-seven, adding approximately another $num-one of ffo.
finally, i'd like to mention that the board of directors has approved a quarterly dividend of $num-one for the first quarter, an increase of $num-two from our previous dividend, which we believe is supported by our collection efforts in the fourth quarter, and is an expression of our board's confidence in the embedded growth of our portfolio that we believe will recover post-pandemic.
and by the way, it was oversubscribed num-one times.
i would apply some percentage growth to the $num-one of the qtr-four year-five ffo beginning in qtr-three year-six and continuing into qtr-four year-six.
in such regard, i am extremely proud to announce that our inaugural public offering, which we closed on [date], year-six, the offering consists of $num-one million of num-two% senior unsecured notes due num-three.
we believe that our high-quality portfolio and superior close to west coast locations will begin to return to normal post-pandemic, and our expectation is that our net debt-to-ebitda will begin working its way back down to num-one% or less, based on the corporate model that i'm looking at.
the estimated yield for this development is approximately between num-one% and num-two% based on the market conditions today.
a num-one% yield on $num-two million is approximately another $num-three million of noi or $num-four of ffo.
from my perspective, i believe $num-one of ffo for qtr-four year-five is the bottom.
secondly, the waikiki beach walk retail coming back in partial strength in year-seven, adding approximately another $num-one of ffo.
absent these short-term abatements, office same store cash noi growth in qtr-four year-five compared to qtr-four year-four would have been approximately num-one%.