as we reported last night, total ffom for the third quarter of year-five was $num-one million or $num-two per fully diluted share.
first year student enrollment is only down num-one% for fall.
our rent collection rate improved to num-one% in september, the first full month of the new academic year in most of our markets, from approximately num-two% in qtr-two.
within acc's num-one markets, we are now tracking num-two beds currently under construction for year-six, of a potential additional num-three beds planned, but not yet under construction, reflecting a decline of num-four% to num-five% in new supply off the current year's decline in new supply of num-six%.
while the company's near-term earnings will, of course, be affected by the governmental and university actions taken in response to the pandemic, we believe that we are on a path to return to a relative level of normalcy both operationally and financially after achieving over num-one% for this fall despite the amount of ongoing online instruction as well as seeing significant reductions in delinquencies, refunds, and resident hardships as we have started the new academic year.
as expected, our third quarter other income was impacted by $num-one million due to the loss of summer camp conference business, the continued waiver of online transaction fees and late payment fees, and higher levels of bad debt.
of the half of our universities that had decreases in enrollment, they only averaged a num-one% decline for fall year-five.
our lease-up occupancy exceeded num-one%, a level many believe to be a best-case scenario in the early days of this pandemic.
overall, we've seen only a num-one% decline in enrollment across those num-two markets.
like last quarter, we cannot completely isolate every item related to the pandemic, but we believe ffom was negatively impacted by approximately $num-one million versus our original expectations for the quarter.
although our leverage levels are temporarily elevated relative to the targets we have historically communicated, we feel confident that with the three-year capital plan we layout on page txt-num as well as the expected normalization of the ebitda, the company's debt to total assets will return to the mid-num-one% range and net debt-to-ebitda to the high five to low six times range.
during the quarter, we provided $num-one million in rent refunds to on-campus residents at one ace partnership university, which we expect to decrease to $num-two million in the fourth quarter.
and $num-one million due to lower opening occupancy for the fall semester relative to our original expectations.
in regards to collections, we had a num-one% collection rate on our rent charge for september, a significant improvement from the num-two% seen during the second quarter.
with regard to same-store opex, we were able to partially offset lost revenue with savings and operating expenses of num-one%, led by savings in all of our controllable categories.
total property revenue was approximately $num-one million impacted for the quarter, with $num-two million due to covid-related rent relief, lost summer camp revenue, increased bad debt, and wave fees.