core funds from operations for the num-txtd quarter was $num-one per share, representing a num-two% year-over-year increase.
adjusted funds from operations per share for the quarter increased num-one% year-over-year to $num-two.
during the num-txtd quarter, we declared monthly cash dividends of [phonetic] $num-one per common share for july, august and september.
as mentioned on the last num-one calls, we expect to achieve high single-digit earnings growth for full year affo per share.
building upon our num-one% affo per share growth in year-five, this implies num-two year stack growth in the mid teens.
i'm very pleased to report that we achieved record investment volume of approximately $num-one billion for the first num-two months of year-six with continued momentum heading into the num-txth quarter of this year.
while our investment activities further strengthen our best-in-class retail portfolio we have also fortified our robust balance sheet with $num-one billion of capital markets transactions year-to-date positioning our company for dynamic growth in the quarters ahead.
subsequent to quarter end, we again increased the monthly cash dividend by num-one% to $num-two per common share for october.
over the course of his career, mike has raised in excess of $num-one billion of capital through numerous transactions.
on an annualized basis, the monthly dividends represent an num-one% increase over the annualized dividend from the num-txtd quarter of last year.
at quarter end, we had approximately num-one million shares remaining to be settled under existing forward sale agreements which are anticipated to raise net proceeds of more than $num-two million upon settlement.
on a num-txtear stacked basis, our investment grade exposure has improved by roughly a num-one basis points.
as of [date], our portfolio's total investment grade exposure was approximately num-one% representing close to num-two basis point year-over-year increase.
notably, we completed our inaugural preferred equity offering during the num-txtd quarter, raising $num-one million at a num-two% coupon.
as mentioned, through the first num-one months of the year, we've invested a record $num-two billion in num-three retail net lease properties spanning num-four states across the country and num-five retail sectors.
the acquired properties at a weighted average cap rate of num-one% and a weighted average lease term of num-two years.