we reported first quarter adjusted earnings per share of $num-one, more than double the year ago period.
for the quarter, there were about $num-one per share of adjusted items for earnings per share purposes, which are referenced in slide-num in the appendix.
adjusted segment operating profit was $num-one billion, num-two% higher than the first quarter of year-five and our sixth consecutive quarter of year-over-year adjusted op growth.
looking ahead, we expect continued strong demand for flavors and proteins and improving demand for our animal nutrition products as restrictions ease to drive second quarter results that will be significantly higher than the prior year quarter, supporting the num-one% per annum trend growth rate for the calendar year.
results for the quarter were affected by about $num-one million in negative timing related to ocean freight positions.
the ag services and oilseeds team delivered an outstanding quarter with operating profit of $num-one million, representing a record for a first quarter.
the nutrition team delivered num-one% revenue growth on a constant currency basis and solid year-over-year operating profit growth.
it includes our work with growers to implement responsible farming practices, including the num-one million acres we've enrolled in sustainable farming programs globally in recent years.
as part of this ambitious plan, we aim to achieve full traceability throughout our direct and indirect south american soy supply chains by year-seven and have deforestation-free supply chains around the world by num-one.
as we move through the winter and into spring, we saw industry inventories falling almost num-one% during the quarter, ending almost num-two% lower year-over-year on [date].
and we are seeing a strong demand for beverages, alternative proteins and nutritional supplements, including expected sales growth of num-one% for plant protein ingredients this year.
we launched new initiatives like our $num-one billion challenge with prioritized operational excellence, and we focused on returns as our primary financial metric.
it encompasses our strive num-one goals to reduce the environmental impact of our processing operations, exemplified by the recent announcement of our partnership to help advance the proposed revolutionary zero emission power facility, utilizing our carbon capture and storage facility adjacent to our operations in decatur, illinois.
our trailing fourth quarter average adjusted roic was num-one%, num-two basis points higher than our year-six annual wacc and significantly higher than the num-three% in the year ago period.
since then, we made impressive progress, including achieving num-one% traceability to mill in our farms around supply chain and full traceability to farm for direct suppliers in num-two key municipalities in the brazilian cerrado.
we still anticipate our calendar year effective tax rate to be in the range of num-one% to num-two%.