for the quarter, adjusted earnings per share increased num-one% to $num-two and a full year earnings per share was a record $num-three, up num-four% year-over-year.
adjusted earnings per diluted share excluding the impact of foreign exchange increased num-one% in year-five.
as a result, total sales were down num-one% for the quarter and num-two% for the year.
as expected, we saw modest sequential sales improvement in the quarter with a decrease of num-one% for the quarter and num-two for the year.
and then when you think of aflac's board of directors, num-one% were minorities and num-one% were women.
in year-five, aflac japan generated solid overall financial results with a stable profit margin of num-one%, an extremely strong premium persistency of num-two%.
a recent example is the board's decision to increase the quarterly dividend by num-one% to $num-two per share.
adjusted book value per share including foreign currency translation gains and losses to num-one% both for the quarter and full year.
additionally, the board approved a first quarter dividend increase of num-one%.
now turning to aflac us, we saw a stable profit margin of num-one% amid a year of intense investments in the future of our business and the global pandemic conditions.
at the same time, we remain tactical in our approach to share repurchase, buying back $num-one billion of our shares in year-five.
wrapping up my comments, we believe the investments made in the past num-one years and accelerated during the pandemic, positioned us for future growth and efficiency in the face of what we believe to be temporary weakness in sales and earned premium.
for aflac us in year-five, covid claimants totaled num-one with incurred claims of approximately num-two million in the quarter and $num-three million for all of year-five.
earlier this week, the government of japan extended their state of emergency for tokyo and num-one other prefectures through [date].
executive orders are still in place in num-one states as of the end of the quarter with num-two states having open-ended expiration dates.
i'll then provide an update on key initiatives in japan and the us, japan has experienced approximately num-one covid cases and num-two confirmed since inception of the virus.