excluding this charge, adjusted earnings per share was $num-one for the quarter, down num-two% from the prior year.
we reported another solid quarter with net sales of $num-one million and adjusted ebitda of $num-two million.
during the third quarter, we generated net sales of $num-one million, an num-two% increase from the same period last year.
the gaap net loss of $num-one million includes a $num-two million after-tax charge related to the recently announced huntsman arbitration decision.
sales improved by num-one% on a year-over-year basis, while adjusted ebitda was relatively flat compared to the third quarter last year.
following the close of the transaction, which is expected in the first quarter of next year, we plan to make additional investments to bring qinzhou plant to albemarle standards and ramp to initial production of num-one metric tons.
at the end of september, we announced an agreement to acquire tianyuan for $num-one million, including a recently built conversion plant near the port of qinzhou designed to produce up to num-two metric tons of lithium per year with the potential to expand to num-three metric tons per year.
excluding fcs from our third quarter year-five results, our net sales were num-one% higher and ebitda was up num-two%.
catalyst full year year-six ebitda is now expected to decline between num-one% and num-two%.
we plan to build identical conversion plants with initial target production of num-one metric tons of battery-grade lithium hydroxide at each site.
third quarter adjusted ebitda of $num-one million increased by num-two% or $num-three million compared to the prior year, excluding the sale of fcs.
these projects position us for initial added conversion capacity of up to num-one metric tons of lithium hydroxide on an annual basis to meet our customers' growing demands.
initially, wodgina will begin one of three processing lines, each of which can produce up to num-one metric tons of lithium spodumene concentrate.
in total, we expect ebitda margins to be lower in the fourth quarter due to higher raw materials, energy and freight costs across all num-one of our businesses.
in addition to this plant, we have signed two recent agreements for investments in china to support two greenfield projects, each initially targeting num-one metric tons per year.
full year year-six average margins are expected to remain below num-one% due to higher costs related to the project start-ups and tolling partially offset by productivity improvements.