last year's results were $num-one per share on net income of $num-two million.
although these results were below our internal expectations for the quarter due to the impact of extreme weather and timing, we remain confident in our ability to achieve our original guidance range of $num-one to $num-two per share.
today, allete reported first-quarter year-six earnings of $num-one per share on net income of $num-two million.
earnings in year-five were $num-one per share on net income of $num-two million.
primarily driven by this positive development, we now anticipate that our regulated operations will be at the higher end of our guidance range of $num-one to $num-two per share.
our original year-six guidance included a projection of minnesota power's industrial sales, which reflected a partial recovery from year-five with anticipated production from our taconite customers of approximately num-one million tons.
despite the negative impact due to the extreme winter weather conditions and lower-than-expected wind resources impacting allete clean energy during the quarter, we remain confident in achieving our year-six earnings guidance of $num-one to $num-two per share.
and allete clean energy and our corporate and other businesses are expected to be at the lower end of our original guidance of $num-one to $num-two per share, primarily due to the extreme winter weather event previously discussed.
and as we shared with you in february, we're committed to achieving our num-one% to num-two% average annual earnings per share growth objective.
as i noted, total timing impacts in the first quarter of approximately $num-one per share are expected to reverse throughout the year.
the timing of income taxes and operating and maintenance expense in the first quarter of year-six negatively impacted results compared to internal expectations by approximately $num-one per share, which is expected to reverse during the remainder of the year.
and we now expect production for minnesota power's taconite customers to be approximately num-one million to num-two million tons.
this irp outlines our plans to further transform minnesota power's energy supply to num-one% renewable by num-two and to be coal free and num-three% lower carbon by num-four.
as we highlighted earlier this year, a significant step forward in our commitment to sustainability as minnesota power's recently announced vision to deliver num-one% carbon-free energy to customers by num-two.
timing of income taxes of approximately $num-one million negatively impacted earnings in the first quarter, which is expected to reverse during the year.
megawatt hour generation was approximately num-one% below our expectations for the quarter, resulting in lower revenue and production tax credits.