we expect economic earnings per share to be in the range of $num-one to $num-two, reflecting an adjusted ebitda range of num-three million to $num-four million.
adjusted ebitda of $num-one million grew num-two% year over year, driven by strength in both management and performance fees, and economic earnings per share of $num-three benefited from an enhanced level of share repurchase activity.
we expect adjusted ebitda to be in the range of num-one to num-two million based on current aum levels, reflecting our market blend, which was up num-three% as of friday.
amg delivered strong earnings growth despite net client cash outflows of $num-one billion that were driven by certain quantitative strategies and seasonal client redemptions.
since the second quarter of year-five, the earnings power of our business has increased considerably driven by the strong and improving performance from the large majority of our affiliates, combined with the impact of strategic investments and actions we have taken to reposition our business over the past num-one months.
economic earnings per share of $num-one and further benefited from an elevated level of share repurchase activity, which i'll expand on in a moment.
these collective actions contributed to year-over-year growth in ebitda of num-one% in the fourth quarter, driven by growth in management fees and performance fees, as well as operational efficiency.
our estimate includes a performance fee range of num-one to num-two million, reflecting normal seasonality and strong performance at our liquid alternative managers.
in the first quarter, we expect to repurchase approximately num-one million of shares, which is elevated by num-two million as a function of our strong year-end cash position and first-quarter performance fee expectations.
for modeling purposes, we expect our gaap and cash tax rates to be approximately num-one and num-two%, respectively, for the first quarter.
we reported net outflows of $num-one billion in global equities and $num-two billion in u.s. equities, partly due to the impact of retail seasonality.
our effective gaap and cash tax rates were num-one and num-two% for the fourth quarter.
for the fourth quarter, adjusted ebitda of $num-one million grew num-two% year over year, driven by strong investment performance, higher markets, lower corporate expenses and the impact of growth investments in both existing and new affiliates, including affiliate equity purchases.
intangible-related deferred taxes were negative num-one million in the fourth quarter, and we expect intangible related deferred taxes to be num-two million in the first quarter.
our adjusted weighted average share count for the fourth quarter was num-one million, and we expect share count to be approximately num-two million for the first quarter.
in the first quarter, we expect this line item to be approximately num-one million.