economic earnings per share of $num-one grew num-two% year over year, further benefiting from ongoing share repurchase activity.
economic earnings per share of $num-one grew num-two% year over year.
economic earnings per share of $num-one grew num-two% year over year and represented the strongest second quarter in our history, primarily driven by ebitda growth of num-three% and ongoing share repurchase activity.
on a full-year year-seven basis, we expect parnassus to contribute approximately num-one million of ebitda and $num-two of economic earnings per share.
our adjusted weighted average share count for the second quarter was num-one million, and we expect our share count to be approximately num-two million for the third quarter.
we expect adjusted ebitda to be in the range of num-one to num-two million based on current aum levels, which reflect a flat market blend through yesterday and seasonally lower performance fees of up to num-three million.
net of onetime transaction costs, we expect parnassus to contribute approximately $num-one million to our fourth-quarter ebitda results.
outflows from certain quant strategies totaled num-one billion and had a de minimis impact on our earnings.
and last week, the fund reached a significant milestone, crossing the $num-one billion mark in aum.
together with our recent investment in boston common, a long-term leader in impact investing, we expect that these new affiliates will contribute over num-one million in ebitda in year-seven and contribute meaningfully to our organic growth over time.
for the quarter, adjusted ebitda of num-one million grew num-two% year over year, driven by strong affiliate investment performance in markets and the impact of our growth investments.
in alternatives, our illiquid strategies posted another strong quarter, with num-one billion in net inflows, led by strong fundraising at pantheon, eig, and bearing.
our adjusted ebitda included num-one million of performance fees, and as i mentioned previously, reflects excellent affiliate investment performance, particularly in our liquid alternatives category.
net client cash inflows, excluding certain quantitative strategies, worth num-one billion in the quarter, driven by private markets, specialty fixed income, u.s. equities, esg strategies, and the strategic evolution of our u.s. wealth platform, amg funds.
intangible-related deferred taxes were num-one million this quarter and we expect this to decline to a more normalized level of num-two million in the third quarter.
in the second quarter, we repurchased $num-one million of shares, bringing us to $num-two million year to date, and we remain on track for $num-three million of repurchases for the full year, subject to market conditions and the timing of new affiliate investments.