as noted in our earnings material, fx translation was a favorable impact of approximately $num-one per share in qtr-three and $num-two per share year-to-date.
we translated strong adjusted operating income growth into adjusted earnings per share growth of num-one% in qtr-three and num-two% year-to-date.
as i further reflect on our performance year-to-date, as greg noted, organic revenue growth was num-one% in the third quarter and num-two% year-to-date, our strongest organic revenue growth in over a decade.
notably, our strongest growth in over a decade for two quarters in a row, driven by mid-single-digit or greater organic revenue growth from every solution line, highlighted by particular strength in health and commercial risk at num-one% and num-two%, respectively and adjusted earnings per share growth of num-three%.
in qtr-three, this repatterning negatively impacted margins by approximately num-one basis points, resulting in qtr-three operating margin contraction of num-two basis points.
excluding this impact, margins would have expanded by num-one basis points in qtr-three and num-two basis points year-to-date.
focusing on financial performance in qtr-three, our global team delivered outstanding results across each of our key financial metrics, including num-one% organic revenue growth.
collectively, the headwind from expansionary patterning and tailwind from slower investment as compared to revenue growth were the main factors driving num-one basis points of margin contraction in qtr-three and num-two basis points of margin expansion year-to-date.
in qtr-three, we issued $num-one billion of senior notes as we return closer to historical leverage ratios, while maintaining our current investment-grade credit ratings.
interest expense in the fourth quarter is expected to be approximately $num-one million, reflecting our increased debt levels.
i would also note that total reported revenue was up num-one% in qtr-three and num-two% year-to-date, including the favorable impact from changes in fx rates driven by a weaker u.s. dollar versus most currencies.
free cash flow decreased num-one% year-to-date to $num-two billion as strong revenue growth was offset by the $num-three billion termination fee payment and other related costs.
as we've described, the timing of expenses is changing year-over-year, such that $num-one million of expenses moved into qtr-three from qtr-four.
many examples highlight our talent focus and priority, including our commitment on our entrepreneurship programs and a $num-one million investment to create num-two new roles in the apprenticeship community.
our investment in talent development has over num-one aon colleagues around the world have participated in training programs in the last nine months alone, and the announcement of the ann united growth ownership plan.
of the total $num-one billion of termination fee and other related costs, a pre-tax amount, the $num-two billion termination fee was paid in qtr-three and approximately num-three of the remaining charges will be paid in year-six, with the majority of the balance paid in year-seven.