our distributable earnings for the quarter were $num-one million and $num-two per share, and gaap net income available to common stockholders was $num-three million or $num-four per diluted share.
gaap book value per share prior to depreciation and the general cecl reserve increased slightly to $num-one from $num-two at the end of last quarter.
as a result, ari's construction exposure continues to decline, representing approximately only num-one% of the portfolio at quarter-end.
the loan portfolio at quarter-end was $num-one billion, a slight decline from the end of previous quarter due to increased loan repayments.
in the past year ari, expanded the company's board of directors from num-one to num-two members, with the addition of pamela carlton and carmencita whonder.
our debt-to-equity ratio at quarter-end decreased slightly to num-one times and we ended the quarter with $num-two billion of unencumbered loan assets.
we expect ari loan origination totals for year-six will approach pre-pandemic levels as we have already committed to an additional $num-one million of transactions in the fourth quarter and we are working through a number of other transactions that should close by year-end.
in the current highly competitive environment, the strength of the apollo commercial real estate debt platform again has proven to be incredibly beneficial as we have completed approximately $num-one billion of new transactions for ari through the first three quarters of the year.
we increased our secure facility with j.p. morgan to $num-one billion and extended the maturity to september of year-nine.
we ended the quarter with almost $num-one million of total liquidity, which was a combination of cash and capacity on our lines.
through [date], we have received almost $num-one million of loan repayments and an additional $num-two million of loans have repaid since quarter-end.
approximately num-one% of our floating rate u.s. loans have libor floors that are in the money today, with a weighted average floor num-two%.
the portfolio had a weighted average unlevered yield of num-one% and the remaining fully extended term of just under three years.
as a result of our success in europe, loans securing properties in europe represent approximately num-one% of ari's portfolio at quarter-end.
we also made $num-one million of add-on fundings for previously closed loans.
during the quarter, we made a $num-one million first mortgage, $num-two million of which was funded.