for the second quarter, we reported strong financial results, with distributable earnings prior to realized loss and impairments of $num-one million or $num-two per share.
gaap net income available to common stockholders was $num-one million or $num-two per share.
gaap book value per share prior to depreciation and general cecl reserve increased to $num-one as compared to $num-two at the end of the first quarter.
consistent with our prior commentary on corporate finance strategy, we felt it was prudent to continue to term out some of our financing, access additional non asset-specific leverage and increase our pool of unencumbered assets, which were north of $num-one billion at quarter-end.
i also wanted to provide an update on num-one west num-txth street.
the company originated five first mortgage loans totaling $num-one million, bringing year-to-date total originations to $num-two billion.
more importantly, the commercial real estate transaction market remains robust, with real capital analytics reporting num-one% increase in second quarter volume versus last year.
given the pace of development and the strength of the brooklyn submarket, we reduced the original reserve against this asset by $num-one million.
ari completed an eight year $num-one million debut offering of senior secured notes priced at num-two/num-three%.
subsequent to the quarter, an additional $num-one million of loans repaid as repayment activity in general is becoming more consistent with pre-pandemic expectations.
with respect to the specific cecl reserve, we reversed $num-one million against our fulton street loan, as we continue to make progress in readying the site for a multifamily tower development, as well as improvements in the brooklyn multifamily market.
we also foreclosed on a hotel asset in washington, d.c. and recorded an additional $num-one million loss, bringing our total loss against that asset to $num-two million.
the loan portfolio at quarter end was $num-one billion, a num-two% increase since the end of year-five.
demolition is moving forward at the property on fulton street in brooklyn, which will be developed into an approximately num-one story, num-two unit multifamily tower.
three loans totaling approximately $num-one million repaid during the quarter, including one hospitality loan and two subordinate residential for-sale loans, one of which was a large new york city project, and the other was for a condominium development in los angeles.
year-to-date, approximately num-one% of our transactions completed were loans secured by properties throughout europe.