we expect our third quarter adjusted earnings per share, excluding any restructuring expenses, acquisition costs and changes in the fair value of equity investments, to be in the range of $num-one to $num-two per share.
second quarter adjusted earnings per share increased num-one% to $num-two per share on a comparable basis with the prior year and when neutralizing currency effects.
slide eight and nine cover our year-to-date performance and show the num-one% core sales growth and our adjusted earnings per share which were $num-two, up num-three% compared to the $num-four a year ago, including comparable exchange rates.
in addition, we continue to invest in innovative growth projects, and we are confirming our forecasted range of capital expenditures for the year at a range of $num-one million to $num-two million.
aptar's adjusted ebitda increased num-one% to $num-two million compared to the prior year, and this included the negative impact of the shift in business across our markets as well as a net negative inflation impact of approximately $num-three million.
briefly summarizing our segment results, our pharma business performance was mixed across the different divisions with total segment core sales growth of num-one%.
core sales to the personal care market decreased num-one% as higher sales to the hair care and sun care markets were offset by declines in personal cleansing as hand sanitizer demand normalizes.
approximately num-one% of the growth came from increased volumes.
in our food + beverage segment, top line growth was strong across each market segment with about num-one% of the growth coming from price adjustments related to the passing through of higher resin costs.
core sales to the prescription market decreased num-one%, and core sales to the consumer healthcare market decreased num-two% as certain pharma customers in these markets continue to draw down inventory levels as treatment for allergic rhinitis and cough and cold are impacted by low levels of patient consumption and fewer overall noncritical doctor appointments.
canvas is a highly accomplished business leader with over num-one years of experience developing and marketing products for the healthcare, cosmetics, food and beverage industries.
turning to our food + beverage segment, which had another solid performance, core sales increased num-one%.
core sales to the beauty market increased num-one% due to higher consumer demand for fragrances and facial skin care products.
the estimated tax rate range for the third quarter is num-one% to num-two%.
core sales of our active material science solutions increased num-one%, primarily due to increased sales of our protective packaging solutions for probiotic products and covid diagnostic test solutions.
we have entered into an agreement to acquire num-one% of weihai hengyu medical products, a leading manufacturer of elastomer components for injection devices in china.