we expect a second quarter adjusted earnings per share, excluding restructuring and any change in the fair value of equity investments to be in the range of $num-one to $num-two per share.
we reported earnings per share of $num-one, which is an increase of num-two% over the prior year.
with core sales up num-one%.
current period reported earnings included a non-cash pre tax gain of $num-one million or $num-two per share related to an increase in the fair value of an equity investment.
as stephan stated, for the first quarter, we reported sales growth of num-one%.
first quarter adjusted earnings per share excluding restructuring expenses, and the gain on the equity investment increased num-one% to $num-two per share on a comparable basis with the prior year, including adjusting for currency effects.
it has also maintained our strong focus on sustainability, and aptar was recently named among the top num-one companies for reducing environmental impact by just capital, alongside dell, ibm, microsoft, mastercard, and several other large companies.
in addition, we continue to invest in innovative growth projects, and we are confirming our forecasted range of capital expenditures for the year at a range of $num-one million to $num-two million.
with unit sales growth by market on a core basis, core sales to the beauty market decrease num-one% due to continued localized lockdowns, especially in europe, and global travel restrictions, which have caused a significant reduction in traditional retail, the duty free sales.
on the net basis, it was approximately num-one%.
looking at sales growth by market compared to the prior year, core sales to the prescription market decreased num-one%.
core sales to the personal care market increased num-one% due to continued strong demand for our hand sanitizer and liquid soap dispensers.
and core sales to the consumer healthcare market decreased num-one% for the reasons that stephan mentioned earlier.
briefly summarizing our segment results, our pharma business performance was mixed across the different divisions with total segment core sales even with the prior year, and then adjusted ebitda margin of approximately num-one%.
the estimated tax rate range for the second quarter is num-one% to num-two%.
core sales of our active material science solutions increased num-one% primarily due to increase sales of our active containers used for probiotics.