adjusted free cash flow was $num-one million lower in the first quarter compared to the prior year period.
turning to rate or revpor, the first quarter was num-one% higher year-over-year and num-two% higher on a sequential same-community basis.
when looking within num-one minutes of brookdale's owned and leased portfolio, construction starts have dropped num-two% from the peak.
when the transaction closes, we expect to receive approximately $num-one million in net cash proceeds which will strengthen brookdale's liquidity position.
the $num-one million change was primarily from $num-two million of infrequent items, including pay down of debt and letters of credit and our annual insurance funding, $num-three million of negative adjusted free cash flow and $num-four million of ongoing debt principal payments.
adjusted ebitda for the first quarter year-six was $num-one million compared to $num-two million for the prior year quarter, of which $num-three million was from the one-time management termination fee related to the healthpeak transaction, i just mentioned.
non-development capex was $num-one million lower than the prior year due to timing of elective projects.
the upcoming baby boomer opportunity is strong with nearly num-one million potential new residents starting within a year.
on a same community basis, the first quarter senior housing operating expense improved num-one% year-over-year.
upon the closing of the transaction, the net proceeds of approximately $num-one million will strengthen our liquidity position.
the working capital change was a benefit of $num-one million.
with the benefit of our communities completing num-one% of first vaccine clinics in february, our occupancy decline rapidly moderated.
with num-one% of our residents benefiting from the protection of these life saving vaccine, we have made a significant positive impact in helping our nation's seniors reduce their chances of contracting covid.
the remaining senior housing program balances of $num-one million will be paid half in year-six and half in year-seven.
turning to liquidity, as of march num-txtt, total liquidity was $num-one million compared to $num-two million at year-end.
$num-one million was for the employee retention credit associated with wages paid through the end of september year-five along with approximately $num-two million related to government grants.