based on the strength of our earnings and outlook, we are increasing this year's earnings guidance to a range of $num-one to $num-two per share.
we estimate weather positively impacted qtr-three earnings per share by $num-one compared to normal and by $num-two compared to qtr-three year-four.
results for the third quarter of this year include negative covid impacts of approximately $num-one per share, in line with our expectations.
we're also introducing guidance for next year in the range of $num-one to $num-two per share, reflecting our expectation for solid growth year-over-year.
as linn noted, we delivered strong financial performance for the quarter with earnings per share as adjusted of $num-one, up $num-two from last year, driven by strong year-over-year qtr-three results at our gas utilities.
you'll note in our year-six guidance assumptions in the appendix we expect to issue $num-one million to $num-two million of equity through our at-the-market equity offering program in year-six.
we executed operationally and exercised diligent expense management delivering a num-one% increase in earnings over the same period last year.
we've mentioned previously the need to issue up to $num-one million of equity in year-six based on our previously disclosed forecast.
net income as adjusted increased num-one% quarter-over-quarter, while earnings per share as adjusted increased num-two% quarter-over-quarter, the difference driven by dilution from additional common shares outstanding from our equity issuance earlier this year.
in year-four, we provided over $num-one million in charitable giving and we continue to support our strong commitment to the economic viability of our customers and our communities.
in february, we issued $num-one million of equity to help support our year-five capital investments.
and that increases our total five-year forecast of $num-one billion.
for this year, we are increasing our capital investment by $num-one million to $num-two million and for next year, we're increasing our capital investment by $num-three million to $num-four million.
we've identified an additional $num-one million of capital projects.
we're excited to complete our renewable ready subscription-based program for our south dakota and wyoming electric utilities, our num-one megawatt corriedale wind project, we are building to support that program is nearly complete and we expect it to be in full service prior to year end.
not only did we announce a num-one% increase in our dividend, we also completed num-two consecutive years of annual dividend increases, a remarkable achievement that exemplifies our legacy of sustainable growth.