for the num-txtd quarter, we provided guidance of $num-one to $num-two per share, $num-three above consensus estimates at the midpoint.
our ffo per share this quarter was $num-one above market consensus and $num-two above our own forecast, which mike will detail shortly.
we reported ffo for the quarter of $num-one per share, which is $num-two per share, better than the midpoint of our guidance.
at the midpoint, our num-txtd quarter guidance is $num-one per share lower than our second quarter ffo.
us gdp growth was num-one% in the first quarter and predicted to be higher for the second quarter and for all of year-six.
over num-one jobs were created in june and aggregate unemployment decreased to num-two%.
we completed num-one million square feet of leasing, more than double the volume we achieved in the first quarter and only num-two% below our long-term second quarter averages.
acquisition activity net of disposition will add approximately a penny to our num-txtd quarter noi and $num-one to the num-txth quarter.
despite the annual inflation rate rising to num-one% in june, the num-txtear us treasury rate has dropped to around num-two% and the federal reserve's rhetoric remains distinctly dovish given it believes the recent inflation is driven by transitory factors.
we believe our basis in the acquisition, which is $num-one million or $num-two a square foot is very favorable relative to replacement cost and recent office trading activity in the seattle market.
so in summary, after adjusting for $num-one of high terminate higher termination income and deferred expenses from the second quarter, we project our in-service portfolio for the num-txtd quarter to be higher by $num-two at the midpoint and our net acquisition and disposition activity to contribute a penny.
moving to private equity market conditions, $num-one billion of significant office assets were sold in the second quarter flat to last quarter of num-two% from the second quarter a year ago and down approximately num-three% from year-four pre-pandemic levels, and it remains num-four% of commercial real estate transaction activity.
our assumptions result in $num-one of projected incremental noi growth in the num-txtd quarter from these sources.
again, this is due to the outsized termination income and expense deferrals from the second quarter, net of those num-one items, our num-txtd quarter guidance is $num-two per share to $num-three per share higher than the second quarter.
this activity, combined with already signed leases are expected to cover the num-one million square feet of lease expirations that remain in year-six.
in terms of economics, we are paying $num-one million for the building or $num-two a square foot, which leaves us significant latitude relative to comparable sales to budget generous building enhancements.