these exceptional results have significantly enhanced our free cash flow and strengthen our balance sheet with our leverage declining to num-one times at the end of the third quarter.
as a result of our strong financial position and our prospects for continued growth our board of directors has authorized a share repurchase program of $num-one million allowing us to return a portion of our robust free cash flow to our shareholders.
total ebitdar over the last num-one months surpasses $num-two billion and leverage at the end of the third quarter was num-three times and expected to further decline by year-end.
in downtown, las vegas, we posted record third quarter ebitdar of $num-one million on margins of num-two%.
to reflect our confidence in the company's future our board authorized a $num-one million share repurchase program.
for the second straight quarter revenues exceeded both year-four and year-five levels setting a new third quarter record, strong flow through resulted in an adjusted ebitdar of more than $num-one million, also a third quarter record.
as a result of our strong operational performance, we are now generating robust levels of free cash flow, approaching $num-one million over the past num-two months.
sports betting operations in num-one states by year-end fanduel is a clear leader in the expansion of digital gaming, and we are participating in its success as an equity owner and a partner.
in our las vegas locals segment revenues grew num-one% over last year and ebitdar was up almost num-two%, operating margins exceeded num-three% and have been at or above the num-four% mark every quarter of this year.
our third quarter margin grew nearly num-one basis points over last year's record, and is up more than num-two basis points from year-four.
and in our midwest and south segment, we set new third quarter records for both revenues and ebitdar, as ebitdar grew num-one% over prior year and num-two% from year-four.
our quarterly ebitdar was num-one% higher than the third quarter of year-five and num-two% higher than the third quarter of year-four, and our companywide operating margins exceeded num-three% for the second straight quarter.
in all, we expect our digital operations including sports, casino, and social casino will generate more than $num-one million in ebitdar this calendar year.
this amount is an addition to $num-one million remaining from a prior approval.
we also continue to benefit as a num-one% equity partner in fanduel's accelerating expansion across the country and their position, as one of the leading online sports and casino operators in the country.
companywide ebitdar has exceeded the $num-one billion mark in just nine months with margin, significantly higher than pre-closure levels.