we believe that consumer demand, coupled with additional pricing and cost-saving actions, will enable us to deliver adjusted diluted earnings per share of about $num-one.
we're updating our gross inflation guidance to about num-one%, and we are reaffirming our adjusted earnings per share guidance of approximately $num-two.
we paid our first dividend at the increased quarterly rate of $num-one per share or $num-two per share on an annualized basis shortly after the conclusion of qtr-one.
we now expect organic net sales growth of approximately num-one% compared to our prior expectations of approximately flat growth.
organic net sales declined by num-one%, compared to a year ago and increased num-two% on a two-year cagr.
we remain confident in our original adjusted earnings per share guidance of approximately $num-one for the year, but the path to achieve that guidance has changed.
as you can see, on a two-year cagr basis, organic net sales for the first quarter increased num-one% and adjusted earnings per share grew by nearly num-two%.
as you can see on slide-num, our total company retail sales on a two-year cagr basis were up nearly num-one% in the first quarter with strong growth across our frozen, snacks and staples domains.
we're increasing our organic net sales guidance to be approximately plus num-one%, up from approximately flat at the time of our qtr-four call.
we are reaffirming our adjusted operating margin guidance to remain at approximately num-one%.
on an organic net-sales basis, the num-one% decrease during the quarter was driven by a num-two% decline in volume from lapping last year's elevated demand.
as you can see on slide-num, our qtr-one adjusted earnings per share of $num-one was heavily impacted by inflation, as well as by a slightly higher tax rate.
as you can see on slide-num, we currently expect gross inflation to be approximately num-one% for fiscal year-seven, compared to the approximately num-two% we anticipated at the time of our fourth-quarter call.
we now expect gross cost of goods sold inflation to be approximately num-one% for fiscal year-seven.
total conagra weighted dollar share grew num-one points on a two-year basis in the quarter with share gains in each of our domestic retail domains: frozen, snacks and staples.
we previously expected gross inflation of approximately num-one%.