we are experiencing the highest level of tower activity in our history, resulting in a year of outsized growth as we now anticipate num-one% growth in affo per share for full year year-six, meaningfully above our long-term annual target of num-two% to num-three%.
the elevated tower activity drove strong second quarter financial results and another increase to our full year outlook, which now includes an expected num-one% growth in affo per share.
our current num-one% to num-two% growth target was established in year-two when we expanded our fiber and small cell strategy through the completion of our largest acquisition.
and looking forward, i believe our strategy to offer a combination of towers, small cells and fiber solutions, which are all critical components needed to develop num-txt will extend our opportunity to deliver dividend per share growth of num-one% to num-two% per year.
the higher activity levels also drove a $num-one million increase in contribution from services when compared to second quarter year-five, leading to num-two% growth in adjusted ebitda and num-three% growth in affo per share.
this incremental yield resulted in a modest decline in the combined cash yield from num-one% a year ago to num-two% currently.
our full year expectation for capital expenditures has reduced to $num-one billion from our prior expectation of $num-two billion, primarily attributed to the reduction in small cells we expect to deploy this year.
this num-one% to num-two% growth target was an increase of num-three basis points from our prior target since we expected a diverse portfolio to increase our ability to consistently drive long-term growth.
we continue to invest in new assets that we believe will allow us to grow our dividend per share at num-one% to num-two% per year going forward.
this growth provides a very attractive total return opportunity when combined with our current approximately num-one% dividend yield, and we believe our investments in new assets will extend this opportunity into the future.
our diverse portfolio of assets and customer solutions has performed better than expected since we meaningfully augmented our fiber footprint with a large acquisition in year-two as we have grown our dividend per share at a compound annual growth rate of num-one% over that time.
adjusted for the timing impacts associated with the large in-process small cell project, where capital investment has occurred in advance of the corresponding revenue and cash flows, the incremental yield is approximately num-one%.
our diversified strategy of towers and small cells has driven higher growth than expected as we have grown our dividend at a compounded annual growth rate of num-one% since we expanded our strategy in year-two.
over the last year, the market yield in philadelphia has contracted by num-one basis points due to a combination of a lack of small cell activity as this was not a priority market for our customers and more muted growth from fiber solutions.
site rental revenue increased num-one%, including num-two% growth in organic contribution to site rental revenue.
importantly, during the last num-one months, we achieved strong yields on incremental invested capital in denver, increasing the market yield by num-two basis points.