based upon the above, chemed's full year year-five adjusted earnings per diluted share, excluding non-cash expense for stock options, tax benefits for stock options, costs related to litigation and other discrete items, is estimated to be in the range of $num-one to $num-two.
and for comparison purposes, chemed's year-four reported adjusted earnings per diluted share was $num-one.
roto-rooter unit-for-unit commercial revenue declining num-one% in april, improving to a num-two% decline in may and a decline of num-three% in june.
vitas' net revenue was $num-one million in the third quarter of year-five, which is an increase of num-two% when compared to the prior year period.
third quarter year-five unit-for-unit commercial demand did decline num-one% when compared to the prior year quarter.
roto-rooter is forecasted to achieve full year year-five revenue growth of num-one% to num-two%.
roto-rooter generated quarterly revenue of $num-one million in the third quarter of year-five, which is an increase of $num-two million or num-three% over the prior year.
on a unit-for-unit basis, which excludes the oakland and hsw acquisitions completed in july of year-four and september of year-four, respectively, roto-rooter generated quarterly revenue of $num-one million, which is an increase of num-two% over the prior year quarter.
on a sequential basis, third quarter year-five unit-for-unit commercial revenue totaled $num-one million, an increase of num-two% when compared to the second quarter of year-five.
we are currently estimating $num-one million for medicare cap billing limitations for calendar year year-five.
total residential revenue, excluding acquisitions, increased num-one%.
within this context, revenue growth for vitas in year-five prior to medicare cap is estimated to be num-one%.
this aggregate unit-for-unit commercial revenue decline consisted of drain cleaning declining num-one%, commercial plumbing and excavation declining num-two% and commercial water restoration declining num-three%.
total roto-rooter third quarter unit-for-unit revenue increased num-one% when compared to the prior year.
our average daily census did decline two-tenths of num-one percentage point in the quarter.
fortunately, the federal government, specifically hhs and cms have been exceptionally supportive in terms of relaxing regulations, allowing the use of telehealth where appropriate and providing pragmatic flexibility in caring for our num-one patient census.