gaap book value at the end of the first quarter was $num-one per share.
we ended the quarter at num-one times recourse leverage down from num-two times at year-end and num-three times at the end of the third quarter of year-four.
on a core basis, net income for the first quarter was $num-one million or $num-two per share.
this represents a num-one% reduction of recourse leverage over the last three months and num-two% over the past six months.
our gaap net loss for the first quarter was $num-one million or $num-two per share.
as of the quarter end, this portfolio totaled $num-one billion.
the num-txtear treasury note began the year at num-one% and fell num-two basis points to end the first quarter with a yield of num-three%.
we ended the first quarter at num-one times recourse leverage, down num-two% from year-end.
the federal reserve cut its overnight lending rate by num-one basis points over a two-week period as part of its response to the covid pandemic.
also, in april, we closed a public convertible bond offering that raised $num-one million.
we also terminated all our agency hedge positions comprised of u.s. treasury note futures and $num-one billion notional balance on interest rate swaps.
at the end of the first quarter, we had nearly $num-one billion of securitized debt outstanding.
the federal funds rate was cut to num-one%, new purchase plans for treasuries and agency mortgage-backed securities were implemented and funding programs like the tels and commercial paper facility were revived from the num-two federal reserve playbook.
we've arranged over $num-one million of longer-term refocus over these for our credit assets and we executed $num-two million of convertible debt, which further diversifies our liability and capital structure.
and post quarter end, we added two new long term credit financing facilities totaling $num-one million.
in these past six weeks, num-one million people have applied for unemployment benefits, a sharp contrast to the num-two% unemployment rate that we had in february.