income from operations to a $num-one million, down num-two%, reflecting the lower revenue and gross profit.
revenues came in at $num-one million, down num-two% from prior year, with the bulk of that decline in our safety-kleen segment.
eps was $num-one in qtr-two versus $num-two a year ago.
we now expect year-five adjusted ebitda in the range of $num-one million to $num-two million.
safety-kleen revenue was down num-one% due to a slowdown in both the branch and the sk oil businesses, due to customer shutdowns.
participants are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these statements, which reflect management's opinions only as of today, august num-one, year-five.
for year-five, we expect depreciation and amortization in the range of $num-one million to $num-two million, which is slightly below last year.
our incineration utilization increased to num-one% due to our healthy backlog coming into the quarter and steady streams from chemical customers.
as alan highlighted, our ebitda declined less than $num-one million from a year ago, despite revenues being $num-two million lower.
leverage on a net debt basis now sits at num-one times for the trailing num-two months ended june num-txth, which puts us in an excellent position financially.
for safety-kleen, we anticipate adjusted ebitda to decline approximately num-one% from year-four's $num-two million.
our adjusted ebitda margin for the quarter was num-one%, which speaks to how effectively we reduced costs, managed overtime, closed rerefineries and locations and furloughed workers as needed.
as expected, depreciation and amortization in qtr-two was down slightly to $num-one million with only one small bolt-on acquisition in the trailing num-two months, we should continue to see this trend going forward.
our landfill volumes were down num-one%, due to the deferral of some remediation and waste projects, but our base business remained stable, which drove our average price per ton, up num-two% from a year ago.
growth and profitability within incineration, contributions from the expected $num-one million in decontamination work and comprehensive cost reduction initiatives will offset declines in profitability within industrial services, landfills, remediations, waste projects and other lines of business.
adjusted ebitda declined num-one% due to the lower revenue, pricing for our sk oil products and costs associated with the temporary shuttering of our refineries, partly offset by cost reduction efforts and government assistance programs which totaled $num-two million dollars for this segment in qtr-two.