diluted net income per share was num-one cents per share, and adjusted income of num-two cents per share.
on a consolidated basis, the company reported net sales for the first quarter of $num-one million and adjusted ebitda of $num-two million.
we sold num-one point num-two million cases in the first quarter, which was down around num-three% and num-four% compared to the first and fourth quarters of year-five and down num-five% relative to the first quarter of year-four sales at num-six point num-seven million cases.
our sales have converted chronics in the first quarter or num-one point num-two million cases representing a unit decline of num-three% versus prior year.
collectively, this negatively impacted our adjusted eva da by approximately $num-one million are tissue business are lower orders and shipments reflecting overall market trends.
we continue to expect depreciation amortization to be between num-one and $num-two million.
in the first quarter, our net income was $num-one million.
iri market data showed a nearly num-one% decline in overall tissue dollar sales in the first quarter of year-six.
with that said, we expect long term consumption growth to continue between one to num-one% per year.
we're working with our board to develop a medium to long term capital allocation plan and look forward to sharing those thoughts including internal investments, external investments, and the return of capital to shareholders as we approach our num-one.num-txt target leverage ratio.
private brands issue share in the us rose to over num-one% from num-two% in num-three.
we have revised our capital expenditure expectations downward from num-one to num-two million to num-three to num-four million.
tissue demand is expected to weaken further from the first quarter shipments of num-one point num-two million cases, as our shipments in april are at num-three million cases compared to a monthly average in the first quarter of year-six a num-four million cases to address our elevated inventory levels, and expected lower demand from our customers in the short term.
the amount of quote unquote lack of ordered downtime in the second quarter of year-six is expected to exceed num-one of our peak demonstrated production of num-two point num-three million cases in the second quarter of year-five.
as between num-one and num-two and $num-three million.
this is likely a temporary adjustment after a very robust num-one months of pandemic driven demand.