net of all these factors, we delivered diluted net earnings per share of $num-one versus $num-two in the year ago quarter, an increase of num-three%.
on an organic sales basis, our outlook assumes num-one% to num-two% growth.
turning to our fiscal year outlook; we now anticipate fiscal year sales to grow between num-one% to num-two%, reflecting our strong qtr-one results, as well as our raised expectations for the balance of the fiscal year, including double-digit growth in qtr-two.
excluding the contribution from our saudi joint venture acquisition, qtr-one diluted earnings per share grew num-one%.
for the total company, qtr-one sales increased num-one%, reflecting about a point of benefit from the acquisition of majority interest in our joint venture in the kingdom of saudi arabia, and about a point of headwinds from unfavorable foreign exchange impact.
our first quarter effective tax rate was num-one%, compared to num-two% in the year ago quarter, primarily driven by the impact of our increased ownership of our saudi joint venture.
net of these factors, we now expect fiscal year year-six diluted earnings per share to increase between num-one% to num-two% or $num-three to $num-four reflecting our assumption for stronger top line performance, partially offset by a rising cost environment.
turning to our first quarter results; first quarter sales were up num-one%, driven by num-two points of organic volume growth and num-three points of favorable price mix.
this quarter's num-one% organic sales growth is supported by double digit sales growth in eight of our num-two businesses.
in our lifestyle segment, qtr-one sales increased num-one% with double-digit growth in two of three businesses.
organic sales grew num-one%, reflecting about num-two points of benefit from the saudi jv acquisition and about num-three points of unfavorable foreign currency headwinds.
as we shared last quarter, our fiscal year diluted earnings per share outlook continues to include a contribution of $num-one to $num-two from our increased stake in our saudi arabia joint venture, primarily driven by a one-time non-cash gain.
turning to the household segment; qtr-one sales were up num-one% with growth in all three businesses.
on an organic basis, sales grew num-one%.
in our health and wellness segment, qtr-one sales were up num-one%, reflecting double digit growth in all three businesses.
importantly, this represented about a num-one% increase in advertising support this quarter, compared to the year ago period, reflecting stronger investments to support our ambition to accelerate long-term profitable growth.