net of these factors, we anticipate fiscal year adjusted earnings per share to be between $num-one to $num-two.
net of all these factors, adjusted earnings per share for the fourth quarter came in at $num-one versus $num-two in the year ago quarter, a decline of num-three%.
fiscal year year-six adjusted earnings per share decreased num-one% to $num-two.
qtr-four sales were down num-one%.
organic sales are expected to be down num-one% to num-two% as well.
we expect our fiscal year tax rate to be about num-one% to num-two%.
we expect front half sales to decline high single to low double digits as we lap num-one% growth in the front half of fiscal year year-six, during the height of the pandemic.
our sales results reflect an num-one% decline in organic volume and two points of unfavorable price mix, primarily in our health and wellness segment, as supply improvements resulted in a broader product assortment, including the reintroduction of value packs.
we are confident that strong execution of our ignite strategy will enable us to achieve our num-one% to num-two% long-term sales target and deliver long-term shareholder value.
on an organic basis, fourth quarter sales declined num-one%.
we anticipate fiscal year sales to be down num-one% to num-two%, reflecting ongoing demand moderation, primarily in our cleaning and disinfecting products in the front half of the fiscal year, in addition to the unfavorable mix and higher trade spending as we move to a more normalized supply and promotional environment.
the last num-one months have also demonstrated the need to accelerate our ignite strategy to address near-term headwinds and capitalize on long-term opportunities.
on a two-year stack basis, we delivered num-one% sales growth.
despite the complexities we faced, we delivered num-one% sales growth for the fiscal year on a reported and organic basis, reflecting growth in all four reportable segments.
with rising cost pressures, we experienced declines in gross margin, particularly in qtr-four, resulting in a decrease of num-one basis points for the fiscal year, which we will discuss in more detail.
this was on top of the reported num-one% increase we delivered in fiscal year-five.