earnings from continuing operations were num-one million or $num-two per diluted share on net sales of num-three billion.
excluding the impact of a tax benefit related to an international reorganization, adjusted earnings from continuing operations were num-one million or $num-two per diluted share.
as barbara noted, we reported record fiscal first quarter year-seven earnings from continuing operations of num-one million or $num-two per diluted share, more than triple prior-year levels of num-three million and $num-four, respectively.
this represents cmc's num-txth consecutive quarterly dividend with the amount paid per share increasing num-one% from a year ago.
cmc generated core ebitda of num-one million, an increase of num-two% from the year-ago period and an improvement of num-three% from the prior quarter.
the portland cement association once again increased its expectation for cement consumption growth in year-seven and now anticipates an increase of num-one% on a year-over-year basis.
we're also committed to further improvement as we make significant progress toward our num-one environmental goals.
excluding the impact of this item, the adjusted earnings from continuing operations were num-one million or $num-two per diluted share.
cmc's transformational growth projects over the last several years have expanded our north american business by nearly num-one%, necessitating organizational adjustment to accommodate such rapid growth.
this would add roughly num-one% to current domestic consumption of around num-two million tons.
the infrastructure investment and jobs act signed last november will provide num-one trillion in funding over five years and stimulate an estimated num-two million to num-three million tons of incremental annual rebar demand at full run rate.
arizona num-one will also give cmc a coast-to-coast merchant bar footprint and serve several customers we already know well through our mbq operations in alabama, south carolina, and texas.
however, to put this performance into context, during the fiscal num-one and year-zero time period, we experienced similar robust market conditions to what we enjoy today, and our num-txtonth ebitda was between num-two million and num-three million with return on invested capital in the mid-single digits.
we expect the time between the bill's enactment and the commencement of significant construction activity to be in the range of num-one to num-two months, which lines up very well with the scheduled future commissioning of arizona num-three.
the average selling price of downstream products increased by $num-one per ton from the prior year, reaching $num-two.
importantly, arizona num-one will help further optimize cmc's operational network and enhance customer service.