finally, our core income for the third quarter was $num-one million or $num-two per share.
net income was $num-one million or $num-two per share.
you will see on slide-num that we're not assuming the tenure will get back to the num-one% level until num-two, a significant change compared to our prior-year expectations.
exposure continued to be a headwind to our growth as it was down num-one points compared to the third quarter last year.
first, we have lowered our expectation for the normative num-txtear treasury yield to num-one%, a reduction of num-two basis points from last year.
in terms of growth, gross written premium, ex-captives, grew num-one%, while net written premium growth was num-two%, both higher than the second quarter.
shareholders' equity, excluding accumulated other comprehensive income, was $num-one billion or $num-two per share.
the expense ratio has improved by num-one points compared to third quarter year-four, due to both growth in net earned premium and lower expenses.
new business growth was down num-one% versus prior quarter and up num-two% on a year-to-date basis.
and we are pleased to announce our regular quarterly dividend of $num-one per share.
turning to the dynamics of this hard market and starting with pricing, rate increases continued to accelerate as we achieved plus num-one% in p&c overall, up num-two point from the second quarter.
importantly, excluding workers' comp, which had slightly negative rate and our very profitable affinity programs, which had a small positive rate increase, the rate change was plus num-one%, up num-two points from qtr-two and num-three points from qtr-one.
as a result, our previously established covid ultimate loss estimate of $num-one million remains appropriate for all events that occurred through the third quarter, from which we believe claims will eventually emerge and our loss estimate is still virtually all in ibnr.
the underlying combined ratio for specialty was num-one% this quarter, num-two points of improvement compared to third quarter year-four.
new business volume was strong with growth of num-one% over the prior year's quarter.
retention declined num-one point from the second quarter to num-two%, due to our reunderwriting efforts in our london operations, which will essentially be completed in the fourth quarter and to our targeted actions in the us to improve the profitability of certain lines within healthcare and manufacturing that i have spoken about previously.