we've updated our full-year year-six outlook including a narrowed adjusted earnings per share guidance range of $num-one to $num-two.
in the quarter, we generated revenue of $num-one billion and hbr of num-two% and adjusted earnings per share of $num-three.
we do not plan to replace his position, as we continue to work on refreshing and streamline the board to a size of num-one to num-two members.
this outlook incorporates revenues within a range of $num-one billion to $num-two billion increased by the inclusion of circle and expected state-related pass through payments of $num-three million.
we expect to need approximately $num-one billion of unregulated cash to close magellan in the fourth quarter.
continuing on the highlights of the quarter, cash flow provided by operations in the third quarter was strong at $num-one billion.
our qtr-three consolidated hbr was num-one%, right on track with our full year guidance.
we are certainly pleased with over num-one% of membership in num-txttar contracts and our first num-txttar contract, rating year year-seven benefited from the continuation of disaster provisions due to covid with an expectation of those provisions sunsetting and upon reviewing the in-process results of our quality program we expect rating year year-eight scores to drop, followed by a subsequent jump in rating year year-nine scores.
you will see a couple of items in our gaap to adjusted earnings per share reconciliation, a $num-one million one-time gain as a result of our acquisition of the remaining num-two% of circle in early july year-six and a write-down of our investment in rxadvance of $num-three million in the quarter, as we are simplifying our pharmacy operations, both of these are non-cash items.
with respect to unregulated cash we had $num-one billion at quarter end, which includes the $num-two billion we borrowed to partially fund the magellan transaction.
our adjusted sg&a expense ratio was num-one% in the third quarter with higher short term variable incentive compensation costs compared to qtr-two given the positive trajectory of the business.
this has an approximate num-one basis point mathematical impact on our consolidated sg&a rate for qtr-three year-six and going forward.
today, centene serves more than num-one million medicare advantage members across num-two states.
in medicaid our business continues to perform well, membership increased to $num-one million aided by continued suspension of redeterminations and the go-live of our business in north carolina.
beginning in year-seven, the company expects to offer plans in num-one new counties, representing a num-two% increase and three new states including massachusetts, nebraska and oklahoma.
again, we are in the very early stages, and as we continue to leverage our size and scale to our benefit these are just a few of the many levers we are pulling to achieve our adjusted net income margin target of at least num-one%.