non-gaap earnings per share is expected to be in the range of $num-one to $num-two.
non-gaap earnings per share were $num-one.
the guidance includes consolidated revenues of num-one to num-two billion, up num-three to num-four%, or up num-five to num-six% in constant currency, with coopervision revenues of num-seven to num-eight billion, up num-nine to num-three%, or up num-ten to num-eleven% and in constant currency, and coopersurgical revenues of num-twelve to num-thirteen million, up num-fourteen to num-fifteen%, or num-sixteen to num-seventeen% in constant currency.
regarding the quarter and reporting all percentages on a constant currency basis, even with continuing covid challenges, we posted consolidated revenues of num-one million with coopervision revenues of num-two million, up num-three%, and coopersurgical revenues of num-four million, up num-five%.
non-gaap earnings per share was $num-one with roughly num-two million average shares outstanding.
our myopia management portfolio continued to strengthen, including misight growing num-one% to num-two million and coopersurgical posted a very strong quarter with paragard growing num-three% and fertility num-four%.
after the close of the quarter, we entered into an agreement to form a num-one-num-one joint venture with essilorluxottica that we hope to close soon.
our fourth-quarter consolidated revenues increased num-one% year over year, or num-two% in constant currency to $num-three million.
within coopervision, as al mentioned, we acquired the remaining num-one% stake of sightglass vision in january for $num-two million in cash plus aggregate potential earn-outs of up to $num-three million based on revenue milestones and regulatory approvals.
this is all extremely exciting and supports our goal of reaching or exceeding num-one million of misight sales this fiscal year and over num-two million next year.
lastly, on free cash flow, we now expect to approach num-one million this year as operating cash flow improves, and capex reduces.
and we repurchased -- i'm sorry, we purchased it for $num-one million in cash plus a potential earn-out of up to $num-two million.
overall revenues were num-one million, up a healthy num-two% as markets rebounded and we took share.
revenues grew num-one% year over year to num-two million with strikes seen around the world and throughout our product portfolio.
we've also made advancements in discussions with several large retailers and buying groups regarding misight and even moved into a test phase with one large retailer for roughly num-one stores.
it's estimated that roughly one-third of the world is currently myopic, and that's expected to increase to num-one% by num-two.