adjusted earnings per share from continuing operations decreased $num-one or num-two% versus prior year to $num-three per share, partially driven by the estimated $num-four contribution from the additional week in fiscal year-five.
we expect organic net sales to be minus num-one% to plus num-one%, adjusted ebit of minus num-two% to minus num-three%, and adjusted earnings per share of minus num-two% to minus num-four% versus the fiscal year-six results.
fiscal year-six results include a $num-one benefit from mark-to-market gains on outstanding commodity hedges and an approximate $num-two adjusted earnings per share contribution from plum.
full year adjusted earnings per share from continuing operation increased num-one% to $num-two per share.
however, on a two-year cagr, adjusted ebit grew num-one% and adjusted earnings per share grew num-two% as we de-levered and improved our balance sheet.
for the full year, i'm pleased to report that campbell's organic net sales were comparable to fiscal year-five and grew num-one% on a two-year compounded annual growth basis driven by both divisions, reflecting strong end market performance.
turning to slide-num for the fourth quarter organic net sales, which excludes the impact from the additional week and the impact of the sale of the plum baby food and snacks business declined num-one% as we cycled both the elevated demand in food purchases for at-home consumption, and a partial retailer inventory recovery in the prior year.
adjusted ebit decreased num-one% compared to prior year, to $num-two million driven by lower sales volume, including the impact of the additional week in the prior year quarter and a lower adjusted gross margin, partially offset by lower adjusted marketing and selling expenses and lower adjusted administrative expenses.
organic net sales declined num-one% as we lapped a num-two% growth than the prior year and delivered num-one% growth on a two-year cagr basis.
in june, the board authorized a $num-one million anti-dilutive share repurchase program to offset the impact of dilution from shares issued under our stock compensation programs.
the organic net sales decline was driven by a num-one points headwind due to volume declines, partially offset by favorable price and sales allowances and lower promotional spending, which each drove a num-two point gain in the quarter.
compared to the fourth quarter of fiscal year-four, which we view to be more meaningful given the covid impact to prior year, organic net sales increased num-one% on a two-year cagr.
moving to additional assumptions, we expect ongoing supply chain productivity gains of approximately num-one% to num-two% for the year excluding the benefit of our cost savings program.
as previously mentioned, we expect to continue to progress on our cost savings program and expect to deliver an incremental $num-one million in fiscal year-seven, keeping us on track to deliver $num-two million by the end of the fiscal year.
this quarter, we achieved $num-one million in incremental year-over-year savings, which came in ahead of our expectations, resulting in full-year savings of $num-two million, with the majority of the savings from the snyder's-lance integration.
our num-txth quarter organic net sales decline of num-one% and end market performance of minus num-two% reflects cycling the partial inventory recovery and elevated consumption levels in the prior-year quarter.