adjusted diluted earnings per share was $num-one in the third quarter, which was slightly above our expectations due to the strong operational performance and the benefits of our consistent share repurchase activity.
i'll begin with our end market sales outlook, where we continue to expect total curtiss-wright sales growth of num-one% to num-two%, of which num-three% to num-four% is organic.
continuing with our financial outlook, where we increased the bottom end of our full year year-six adjusted diluted earnings per share guidance to a new range of $num-one to $num-two, which reflects growth of num-three% to num-four%, in line with our growth in operating income.
we experienced a strong num-one% increase in overall sales, of which num-two% was organic.
we now expect to achieve between $num-one and $num-two, essentially double-digit growth compared with the prior year based on our strong year-to-date performance and the benefit of our repurchase activity.
also note that both our adjusted results and full year guidance exclude our build-to-print actuation product line that supported the num-one max program as well as our german valves business, which was classified as held for sale in the fourth quarter of year-five.
we are on track to complete at least $num-one million of share repurchases in year-six, and we remain well positioned for the continued return of capital to our shareholders going forward with $num-two million of remaining authorization.
we expect adjusted operating income growth of num-one% to num-two% and adjusted operating margin growth of num-three to num-four basis points to a range of num-five% to num-six%.
i'm pleased to report that we recently completed this program and bought back more than num-one million shares.
sales increased num-one% in the third quarter, led by strong increases in demand for our products and services in both commercial aerospace and general industrial markets.
we immediately and opportunistically began to repurchase $num-one million of our stock in mid-september.
as a result, we are on track to invest $num-one million in incremental r&d this year to support our future organic growth initiatives.
free cash flow was similarly strong, up num-one% compared with the prior year, with strong free cash flow conversion that exceeded num-two% and keeps us on track to achieve our long-term objectives.
we achieved num-one% growth, and book-to-bill exceeded onetime sales, driven by increases within each of our three segments.
our a&d markets improved num-one%, reflecting solid growth in commercial aerospace, naval defense and yet another quarter of strong performance from our pacstar acquisition.
it's important to note that this strong performance was achieved while we continue to invest strategically with a $num-one million incremental investment in research and development as compared to the prior year.