earnings per share $num-one for the third quarter as compared to $num-two in the third quarter of year-four.
and so, we're putting this -- just highlighting this for you, so that when we get to the third quarter of year-six, there is a recognition that we're probably not going to earn $num-one again per share in the third quarter of year-six, although obviously that would be nice if we could.
that is going from $num-one million to $num-two million as compared to year-four.
and that means, our earnings per share is $num-one on a year-to-date basis as compared to $num-two on a year-to-date basis in year-four.
on a year-to-date basis, on slide-num, the net income is up, it's up about $num-one million to -- so it's $num-two million, up from $num-three million in the year-to-date period of year-four.
we've increased our reserve for doubtful accounts by about $num-one million to $num-two million, roughly num-three% of that balance is reserved for, and we'll continue to monitor that as we move into the four quarter.
and because we're recording the effect of the general rate case through the third quarter, in the third quarter, that $num-one, that's in the first part, represents the earnings that would have been achieved in the first two quarters of the year had the rate case been adopted on time.
senate bill num-one, which is the bill, which is now law after being signed by governor newsom, specifies that fire hydrants connected to public water systems are generally not designed or installed to provide water service to aid in the extinguishing of fires that threaten property not served by a water service provider or wildfires.
those factors through the third quarter, are adding about $num-one million to our year-to-date net income.
and if you're there on slide-num, you will notice the first bar change is $num-one, which is titled delayed recording of qtr-one and qtr-two regulatory assets.
capital investments for the third quarter were $num-one million, up num-two% over the same period last year.
so, our over num-one balances has increased to about $num-two million.
year-to-date, our capital investments are $num-one million, up $num-two million year-to-date over year-four.
water sales, in aggregate, have been closer to the adopted levels, or about num-one% of adopted sales in california, with the increases in customer usage, obviously, with people being home, using more water and that was offset by lower business in industrial uses during the quarter.
representing over a num-one% growth in new customer connections across the company's subsidiaries.
the california rate case, if it is a docket, the proposed decision is adopted, actually allows for a specific net income about $num-one million in test year year-five and that reflects the authorized equity return on the equity portion of $num-two billion in rate base.