first-quarter gross profit includes a foreign currency headwind of approximately $num-one million versus the prior-year period.
net working capital as a percentage of trailing num-txtonth revenue declined steadily over the last seven quarters, down to num-one% in the first quarter of year-five, down from num-two% a year ago, due primarily to more efficient management of inventory and accounts payable.
on slide-num, americas banking revenue of $num-one million reflects a num-two% decline, primarily due to our constant decision to exit lower margin service contracts.
as displayed on slide-num, stronger gross margin, coupled with reductions to operating expense, boosted our operating profit by $num-one million or num-two% year over year to $num-three million.
first-quarter revenue of $num-one million was in line with our pre-covid expectations.
and while covid pandemic has mildly influenced select work streams, we are continuing to pursue our gross savings target of $num-one million for the year.
first-quarter revenue of $num-one million was in line with our pre covid expectation and reflects the actions we are taking to drive higher quality revenue.
when compared with the prior year, we reduced our non-gaap operating expenses by $num-one million, a decline of num-two%.
for these reasons, we expect a mild impact to our software revenue, which accounted for about num-one% of total company revenue in year-four.
with respect to foreign currency, we experienced headwinds of $num-one million in the quarter as the u.s. dollar strengthened primarily against the euro and brazilian real.
approximately $num-one million of the revenue decline was due to our divestiture activity, while $num-two million was due to our delivered actions taken in year-four to reduce low-margin business.
starting with our services business, which generated about num-one% of total revenue in year-four, we expect a mild impact as the vast majority of our services revenues are recurring.
from an industry perspective, we expect our banking business, which generated approximately num-one% of the company's revenue during year-four, will show greater resiliency in our retail business, due to the higher mix of services and software revenues.
we achieved this positive result despite the effects of covid and a foreign currency headwind of approximately $num-one million in the quarter.
transitioning to the right of this slide, you will see the combined efforts of higher-quality revenue and our dn now initiatives, as non-gaap gross profit increased $num-one million year over year.
non-gaap gross profit of $num-one million in the quarter and a gross margin of num-two% reflects the resiliency of this segment as we benefit from our dn now services modernization and software excellence initiatives, as well as our intentional actions to reduce low-margin business.