we earned $num-one million in net income or $num-two per share.
excluding these, earnings per share would have been $num-one.
while our revenues were down num-one% year-over-year, our outstanding credit performance combined with the actions we took to reduce our funding costs and control our expenses, enabled us to exit the year with a num-two% roe in the fourth quarter.
earlier this week, our board of directors approved a new $num-one billion share repurchase plan and we may begin buybacks as soon as the first quarter, subject to the federal reserve's limitations.
excluding the one-time items, expenses were down nearly num-one% year-over-year.
regarding share repurchases, as roger indicated, earlier this week, we received authorization from our board of directors to repurchase up to $num-one billion of common stock.
while the economic impacts of the coronavirus pandemic were expansive, our business stood up to these challenges and we are in $num-one million after-tax for the fourth quarter and over $num-two billion for the full year.
our discover proprietary network was down num-one% for the year and exited the fourth quarter at plus num-two%, in line with card sales volume.
we have continued to fund our quarterly dividend at $num-one per share.
in the fourth quarter, net interest income was down num-one%, reflecting a num-two% decline in average receivables and lower loan yield.
non-interest income was num-one% lower, driven by higher rewards costs from strong engagement in the num-two% category this quarter, a one-time write-off of certain real estate facilities and lower loan fee income also contributed to the year-over-year decrease.
our digital bank operating model combined with disciplined expense management has historically generated industry-leading efficiency, but in year-five, we took additional action to control costs and delivered on our commitment to cut $num-one million from planned expenses despite absorbing several one-time items that have occurred during the year.
net interest margin continued to improve, up num-one basis points from the prior year and num-two basis points from the prior quarter to num-three%.
as expected, the tightening of our underwriting criteria combined with elevated payment rates impacted our loan growth and our total loans decreased num-one% year-over-year.
as roger noted, we delivered on our commitment to reduce planned expenses by at least $num-one million during the year, and i'm pleased to say that we accomplished this goal despite several one-time expense items that occurred in year-five.
average consumer deposits increased num-one% from the prior year.