looking ahead to year-seven, we expect core ffo per share will be between $num-one and $num-two, including the num-three% dilution from teraco, as well as num-four to num-five basis points of expected fx headwinds due to the strength of the dollar relative to year-six.
renewal rates rolled down num-one%, driven by a handful of large deals in north america as negative releasing spreads on greater than num-two megawatt renewals more than offset the positive releasing spreads on the sub-num-two megawatt renewals.
in terms of earnings growth, fourth quarter core ffo per share was up num-one% year over year and up num-two% sequentially, driven by solid operational execution, cost controls and a reduction in financing costs due to proactive balance sheet management over the past num-three months.
we further strengthened connections with customers with $num-one million of new bookings with record results in both a zero to num-two megawatt and greater than a megawatt category and ended the year with $num-three million in new bookings, a num-two5% increase over the prior year.
the u.s. dollar strengthened during the fourth quarter relative to prior year exchange rates, and fx represented roughly a num-one basis point headwind to the year-over-year growth in our reported results from the top to the bottom line.
same capital cash noi growth was negative num-one% in the fourth quarter, primarily driven by churn in north america, as well as higher property operating and net utilities expense.
in terms of operating performance, overall portfolio occupancy ticked down num-one basis points, almost entirely due to development deliveries placed in service during the quarter.
the current backlog of leases signed but not yet commenced rose from $num-one million to $num-two million as our fourth -- record fourth quarter signings more than offset commencements.
we expect to deliver revenue between $num-one billion and $num-two billion in year-seven and adjusted ebitda of approximately $num-three billion.
and finally, we continue to strengthen our balance sheet by raising equity capital through the establishment of digital core reit in a highly successful ipo on the singapore stock exchange and the related sale of a num-one% interest in num-two fully utilized core data centers.
turning to our economic risk mitigation strategies on page num-one.
as bill noted, we delivered record bookings of $num-one million with an $num-two million contribution from interconnection during the fourth quarter.
industry research firm gartner recently updated their global it spending forecast for year-seven, projecting a num-one% increase to $num-two trillion, driven by companies investing in digital data growth strategies.
as a reminder, full year core ffo per share excludes the $num-one million promote fee on the prudential joint venture in the third quarter, as well as the $num-two million ppa settlement in the first quarter.
for the full year, core ffo per share was up num-one% year over year and came in $num-two above the high end of our initial guidance range, which did not contemplate the contribution of $num-three billion of assets through digital core reit in early december.
turning to our backlog on page num-one.