in terms of first-quarter operating performance, reported portfolio occupancy ticked down by num-one basis points, largely driven by the sale of fully leased assets during the quarter.
upon commencement of the large combination renewal expansion list i mentioned a moment ago, portfolio occupancy is expected to improve by num-one basis points.
we further strengthened connections with customers, landing record new logos and delivering our fourth consecutive quarter with over $num-one million of bookings.
same capital cash noi growth was negative num-one% in the third quarter, primarily driven by a spike in property taxes in chicago, where local assessors have adopted a very aggressive posture, along with the impact of the ashburn churn event in january.
last but not least, we further strengthened our balance sheet by raising approximately $num-one million of low coupon swiss green bonds and over $num-two billion of common equity to fund our future growth.
excluding this one transaction, our cash mark-to-market would have been a positive num-one%.
for the second straight quarter, we signed total bookings of num-one million.
moving on to renewal leasing activity on page num-one.
we signed num-one million of renewal leases during the third quarter, our largest ever renewal quarter, in addition to new leases signed.
renewal rates for sub-num-one megawatt deals remain consistently positive, greater than the megawatt renewals were skewed by our largest deal of the core that combined a sizable num-txtegawatt renewal with our largest new deal for the quarter, which will land entirely in existing currently vacant or soon to be vacant capacity across chicago and ashburn.
the current backlog of leases signed but not yet commenced rose from num-one million to num-two million, and our third-quarter signings more than offset commencements.
in terms of earnings growth, third-quarter core ffo per share was up num-one% on both a year over year and sequential basis, driven by strong operational execution, cost controls, and a reduction in financing costs from the debt refinancings and redemptions of preferred stock over the past year.
let's turn to our leasing activity on page num-one.
as you can see from the chart on page num-one, our weighted average debt maturity is over six years and our weighted average coupon is down to num-two%.
the weighted average lease term was a little over five and a half years, and we landed a record num-one new logos during the third quarter, with strong showings across all regions, demonstrating the power of our global platform.
we continue to recycle capital by disposing of assets that have limited growth prospects, raising over num-one million in the third quarter for our num-two% position in the prudential jv and some land in arizona.