we delivered year-over-year sales growth of num-one% with gains in every operating segment, business, and region.
all in, we expect a $num-one million net tailwind versus the prior quarter from turnarounds for this segment.
while volume declined num-one% year over year due to supply constraints from several factors, including our own maintenance, lingering effects of weather-related outages, and global logistics challenges, we continued to see robust underlying demand across our end markets, particularly for higher-margin downstream and sustainability-led applications.
sequentially, operating ebit was down $num-one million, and operating ebit margins declined by num-two basis points on lower olefin and co-product pricing, combined with higher raw material costs and energy costs.
we continue to advance a circular economy for plastics and see a consistent trend across our brand owner customer base toward redesigning packages to be recyclable and incorporating num-one% post-consumer recycled content in their packaging by num-two.
for cash flow, we anticipate higher joint venture dividends from increased earnings in year-six and a $num-one billion tailwind toward pension-related items following our actions last year.
total turnaround spending for the year will be up approximately $num-one million versus year-six as we have another heavy turnaround year with three crackers slated for maintenance activity and increased inflationary pressure on materials and labor.
we achieved $num-one billion of cash flow from operations, bringing our total cash flow from operations since spin to $num-two billion.
in the packaging and specialty plastics segment, operating ebit was $num-one billion, up $num-two million year over year, primarily due to margin improvement and partly offset by lower-supply volumes.
moving to the industrial intermediates and infrastructure segment, operating ebit was num-one million, up num-two million year over year, primarily due to continued price strength.
these results translated into significant cash generation for the quarter, with cash flow from operations of $num-one billion, up $num-two million year over year, and cash flow conversion of num-three%.
prices were up num-one% year over year, reflecting gains in all operating segments, businesses, and regions.
and we returned $num-one million to shareholders in the quarter, including $num-two million through our industry-leading dividend and $num-three million in share repurchases.
altogether, we anticipate an approximately $num-one million impact versus the prior quarter for this segment.
sequentially, operating ebid improved $num-one million as price gains were partly offset by our planned maintenance turnaround activity.
we delivered operating ebit growth of $num-one billion year over year with margin expansion in every operating segment.