as a result of our continued strong operating results, we announced revised core ffo guidance for year-six in a range of $num-one to $num-two per share compared to the previous range of $num-three to $num-four per share.
core ffo for the quarter was $num-one per share, which represents num-two% growth over the $num-three per share from the third quarter of year-five.
we expect the lead percent of our total noi to trend toward num-one% by the end of year-seven.
during the quarter, we began roughly $num-one million of new developments with expected strong value creation and irrs, and we raised our full year guidance on starts once again.
let me also note that just after quarter end in very early october, we closed on the sale of a num-one,num-txtquare-foot amazon facility in columbus, ohio.
we now have had three successive quarters of demand at or near all-time records, and projected market level rent growth has risen from the num-one% range to the mid-teens percent nationally and in some submarkets as high as num-two%.
based on these prospects, our revised guidance for development starts is between $num-one billion and $num-two billion compared to the previous range of $num-three billion to $num-one billion.
national asking rents for the full year are expected to be in the mid-teens with some markets like northern new jersey and southern california likely to see increases of num-one% to num-two%.
these quarterly results and our improved outlook for the balance of the year resulted in our raising key components of our year-six guidance, including year-over-year core ffo growth now expected to be at num-one% and growth in affo per share of num-two%.
based on these results and our optimism about the balance of the year, we have raised the dividend by almost num-one%.
the outlook for new starts is strong and is reflected in our revised guidance of our midpoint being up $num-one million.
this third quarter activity has further shifted the geographic position of our portfolio on an noi basis to approximately num-one% in the coastal tier one market.
for the quarter, disposition proceeds totaled $num-one million, including outright sales and contributions to joint ventures.
industrial net absorption registered num-one million square feet, which is only one million square feet less than the all-time record.
this was more than enough to offset the new supply as completions came in at about num-one million square feet.
this positive net absorption over deliveries for the quarter reduced vacancy down to num-one%, setting yet another record low.