these sales translated into solid earnings per share with fourth-quarter adjusted earnings of $num-one.
for the fourth quarter, brinker reported total revenues of $num-one billion, with a consolidated comp sales of num-two%.
in keeping with our ongoing strategy, the majority of these sales were driven by traffic, up num-one% for the quarter, a num-two% beat versus the industry on a two-year basis.
this increase negatively impacted fourth-quarter earnings per share approximately $num-one.
this incremental investment impacted quarterly earnings per share by approximately $num-one and increased labor expense margin by roughly num-two basis points, well worth the benefits it will accrue.
capex of $num-one million to $num-two million, an annual effective tax rate of num-three% to num-four%, and weighted annual share count of num-five million to num-six million shares.
at the brand level, chili's comparable restaurant sales were positive num-one% versus the fourth quarter of fiscal-year year-four, which we believe is the more appropriate comparison for the quarter.
our board of directors has also reinstated the share repurchase authorization that was suspended in the early days of the pandemic with an authorization amount of $num-one million.
labor expense for the quarter, again, as a percent of company sales was favorable num-one basis points versus prior year, primarily driven by the extra week sales leverage versus fixed labor expenses and the slower reopening pace in a couple of high wage states such as california.
additionally, on an absolute dollar basis, the fourth quarter was chili's largest sales quarter on record, topping $num-one million in total revenue.
to reward our operator's strong performance throughout the fiscal year, we also chose to further invest in our hourly team members and managers through a variety of incremental bonus structures, totaling approximately $num-one million for the quarter beyond our normal payout formulas.
maggiano's, while down num-one% compared to fourth quarter of fiscal year-four, made very solid progress with its recovery curve and built positive momentum to carry into the current fiscal year.
our fourth-quarter restaurant operating margin was num-one%.
it's in more than num-one restaurants now, and we anticipate full implementation by november.
and along with the support of our franchise partners, it's just wings became more than $num-one million business in the u.s., with many of our international franchisees also now operating the brand.
in a year of closures and shutdowns, we opened our first virtual brand in over num-one restaurants by leveraging our technological infrastructure, it's just wings surpassed our $num-two million target in our company-owned restaurants.