today, edison international reported core earnings per share of $num-one compared to $num-two a year ago.
reflecting the year-to-date performance and our outlook for the remainder of the year, we are narrowing our year-six earnings per share guidance range to $num-one to $num-two.
edison international reported core earnings of $num-one per share for the third quarter year-six, an increase of $num-two per share from the same period last year.
we are also reiterating our longer-term earnings per share growth target of num-one% to num-two% through year-ten.
as pedro mentioned earlier, we are narrowing the year-six earnings per share guidance range to $num-one to $num-two.
the year-seven equity need will be in the range of $num-one million to $num-two million, and we will provide more specifics on the financing plan when we provide year-seven earnings per share guidance on the fourth quarter year-six earnings call.
and before i start commenting on the quarter, i wanted to note the senior leadership changes that we announced last week, kevin payne, sce's president and ceo, plans to retire on [date], and this is after num-one years with the company.
overall, these updates result in a projected rate base growth rate of num-one% to num-two% from year-six to year-ten.
these investments are indicative of the longer-term opportunity associated with meeting customer needs and clean energy objectives and gives us confidence in reiterating our long-term earnings per share growth rate of num-one% to num-two% for year-six through year-ten.
page num-one provides an update on several major approved and pending applications for recovery of amounts and regulatory assets.
first, sce revised the best estimate of potential losses to $num-one billion from $num-two billion.
we increased our year-seven capital expenditure forecast by approximately $num-one million and lowered the forecast somewhat for year-eight through year-ten because these storage projects accelerate some, but not all of the capacity we previously forecasted in those years.
the net increase in the high end of the capital forecast for year-six through year-ten is approximately $num-one million.
the results of these updates is a reduction to the year-six rate base of $num-one million.
pages num-one and num-two show our year-six guidance and the preliminary modeling considerations for year-seven.
depreciation had a negative variance of $num-one, primarily driven by a higher asset base and a higher depreciation rate resulting from the year-six grc decision.