for the second quarter, we reported $num-one normalized ffo per share.
we saw strong demand on the mh side of the business, with a num-one% increase in rental revenue.
for the second quarter, the annual revenue which historically accounts for approximately num-one% of our total revenue, grew by num-two%.
excluding these expenses, we realized a num-one basis point decline in core property operating expenses in the quarter compared to last year.
the footnote disclosure included in our supplemental financial information package states that our core income from property operations includes approximately $num-one million of non-recurring covid related expenses.
core utility and other income was about $num-one lower than second quarter year-four.
in summary, second quarter core property operating revenues increased num-one basis points and core property operating expenses increased num-two basis points resulting in an increase in core noi before property management of num-three%.
this represents a num-one% decrease for the quarter, which we attribute to the impact of covid.
core rv resort based rental income from annuals increased num-one% for the second quarter and num-two% year-to-date, compared to the same period last year.
we have put in place a rent deferral program for residents facing hardship due to the impact of covid, approximately num-one residents are enrolled in this program.
those credits will be applied to future charges and total approximately $num-one.
our core mh rent growth of num-one%, consists of approximately num-two% rate growth and num-three basis points related to occupancy gains.
core noi before property management, excluding covid related expenses increased num-one%.
we have increased occupancy at num-one sites since december, with an increase in owners of num-two while renters decreased by num-three.
we increased new home sales volume by num-one% and the average purchase price increased by num-two%.
property management and corporate g&a expenses were $num-one million for the second quarter of year-five and $num-two million for the year-to-date period.