given the continued strength of demand in our categories and our efforts to offset the majority of these headwinds through pricing and cost reduction initiatives, we are maintaining our fiscal year-seven outlook for roughly flat net sales, adjusted earnings per share in the range of $num-one to $num-two, and adjusted ebitda of $num-three million to $num-four million.
as we look specifically at the results for the quarter, we maintained strength in our top line, delivering revenue of $num-one million.
with our solid topline performance and lower interest expense, we partially offset the gross margin decline and delivered adjusted earnings per share of $num-one in the quarter.
in battery and lights, strong demand and solid execution resulted in a modest decline in organic sales, while auto care continued its strong performance with organic growth of num-one%.
adjusted gross margin decreased num-one basis points as increased input costs were partially offset by price increases, synergies and the comping of prior year covid costs.
as anticipated, we saw the category decline in the three months ending november year-six, which was down num-one% in value and num-two% in volume.
this impact flowed through to the bottom line for each business, resulting in a segment profit decline of $num-one million for battery and $num-two million in auto care.
absent any additional share repurchase, weighted average shares outstanding for the remainder of the year will be approximately num-one.
excluding acquisition and integration costs, sg&a as a percentage of net sales was roughly flat at num-one% but declined $num-two million on an absolute basis as lower compensation expense was partially offset by increased travel and higher it spending related to our digital transformation.
a&p as a percent of sales was num-one% versus num-two% in the prior year as a result of planned increased spend.
as we turn to the auto care category in the latest num-one weeks, category value was up num-two% versus a year ago and num-three% on a two-year stack basis.
interest expense was $num-one million or $num-two million lower than the prior year, reflecting the benefits of significant refinancing activity of our debt capital structure over the past year.
however, adjusted gross margin decreased num-one basis points to num-two% versus the first quarter of year-six as pricing, lower covid-related costs and synergies were offset by more than num-three basis points of margin erosion from inflationary cost pressures.
this is incremental to the num-one basis points provided in our outlook in november.
however, due to the lag in timing between the recognition of these higher costs, and the successful rollout of our pricing actions and cost reduction efforts, we expect as much as num-one basis points of additional gross margin pressure to impact us for the full year year-seven.
pricing actions globally delivered roughly num-one% growth and additional distribution contributed another num-two%.