ffo as adjusted for the quarter was $num-one per share versus $num-two in the prior year, and affo for the quarter was $num-three per share compared to $num-four in the prior year.
total revenue from continuing operations for the quarter was num-one million versus num-two million in the prior year.
our results for the full-year year-five were clearly impacted by covid as ffo as adjusted per share was $num-one versus $num-two in the prior year, and affo per share was $num-three versus $num-two in the prior year.
these write-offs totaled $num-one per share for the quarter and $num-two per share for the year.
accordingly, the expected range we expect to recognize in qtr-one of year-six is num-one million to num-two million or num-three to num-four% of such contractual cash revenue.
during the lunar new year holiday, detective chinatown three opened with the highest grossing opening day, $num-one million and opening weekend, $num-two million, in history outpacing avengers: endgame.
percentage rents for the quarter totaled num-one million versus num-two million in the prior year.
additionally, the expected range we expect to collect in qtr-one of year-six is num-one million to num-two million or num-three to num-four% of such contractual cash revenue.
in those deferral agreements, we have granted approximately num-one% of permanent rent and interest payment reductions.
key among early actions was to defer an anticipated gaming venue investment of approximately num-one billion, along with deferring other uncommitted investment spending of approximately num-two million.
from there, we make the additional adjustments to the portfolio i just described, to come to the current contractual cash revenue amount of num-one million for the first quarter and num-two million annualized.
total disposition proceeds in the quarter were num-one million.
tenants and borrowers paid num-one% of pre-covid contractual cash revenue for the fourth quarter versus num-two% and num-three% in the second and third quarters, respectively.
transaction costs were $num-one million for the quarter compared to num-two million in the prior year.
due to stronger collections and significant liquidity, including num-one million in net proceeds received from property dispositions in the fourth quarter, we reduced the outstanding balance by num-two million to num-three million at year-end.
as we speak today, our liquidity remains in a strong position with cash on hand in excess of num-one million.