our guidance range for normalized ffo in year-six is $num-one per share to $num-two per share.
major drivers for the change between our year-five normalized ffo of $num-one per share and the midpoint of $num-two from our year-six guidance include a $num-three decline in same store noi based on the revenue and expense assumptions outlined.
we incurred in approximately $num-one million reduction in revenues for the fourth quarter year-five due to uncollected rent.
in the pandemic period overall unemployment rose to almost num-one% and is now around num-two%, while job losses for those with the bachelor's degree or better, which is our target demographic peaked at num-three% and is now gone down to num-four%.
let's start with our full-year year-six total same store revenue guidance range, which is between -num-one% and -num-two%.
as mark mentioned, our collections have remained strong and consistent at approximately num-one%.
starting with boston, strong application volume and improved retention through the fourth quarter resulted in steady gains in occupancy to position us to num-one% today.
both are estimated to have more meaningful growth in the num-one% to num-two% range.
even in the pandemic, we have seen announcements of new high quality jobs in our urban centers like amazon's announcement that it's putting num-one new technology and software development jobs in the seaport district of boston, and with the recent commencement of construction on disney's new building in hudson square in new york, that will lead to a significant influx of new content creation and technology jobs.
occupancy is just below num-one% and has improved num-two basis points since the beginning of november.
by continuing our efficiency initiatives and keeping our eye on the ball, we should still be able to limit payroll growth for the full year to around num-one%.
we have found some stability in the percent of residents renewing, which stands at approximately num-one% in january, we expect that to improve to around num-two% for february and march, which is still below our usual retention rates for this time of year.
application count exceeded year-four levels by num-one% in the fourth quarter and we were able to generate sufficient front door activity that have move-in, outpace move-out despite higher turnover compared to the year-four record low level.
our los angeles portfolio maintained occupancy above num-one% through the quarter, concession use was modest and averaged just under one month on about num-two% of our applications.
this is the second year in a row that payroll growth has been less than num-one%.
that means as disclosed on page num-one of the release, of the $num-two million in cash residential concessions granted in year-five, we still have approximately $num-three million of unamortized concessions that were reduced revenue in year-six, which is about num-four basis points of same store revenue.