we continue to expect ongoing earnings toward the lower end of our $num-one to $num-two per share guidance.
we are in $num-one per share for the quarter, including $num-two per share of costs primarily relating to the transitioning of eversource gas company of massachusetts into the eversource systems.
our electric distribution business earned $num-one per share in the second quarter of year-six compared with earnings of $num-two per share in the second quarter of year-five.
excluding these costs, we earned $num-one per share in the second quarter and $num-two per share in the first half of year-six.
we also continue to project long-term earnings per share growth in the upper half of the range of the num-one% to num-two% through year-ten excluding the impact of our new offshore wind projects.
our natural gas distribution business earned $num-one per share in the second quarter of both year-six and year-five.
beginning next year, we expect aquarion revenues to be bolstered by previously announced acquisition of new england service company or any sc owns the number of small water utilities that serve approximately num-one customers in connecticut, massachusetts and new hampshire.
our water distribution business aquarion earned $num-one per share in the second quarters of both year-six and year-five.
our electric transmission business earned $num-one per share in the second quarter of year-six compared with earnings of $num-two per share in the second quarter of year-five, a higher level of necessary investment in our transmission facilities was partially offset by higher share count there.
also, we recently filed an application to issue up to $num-one million of long-term debt at eversource gas company of massachusetts.
we are making progress on the num-one larger projects as well.
another team working on developing the strategy to offset emissions that cannot be eliminated by num-one and another team that's encouraging all num-two eversource employees to contribute to their best ideas on how we could achieve our num-one goal.
i mentioned earlier that the public utilities regulatory authority or pura has finalized the $num-one million civil penalty associated with our storm performance last summer that follow the [date] release of a final storm performance decision that we discussed on our first quarter call.
during hearings spring [phonetic] resulted in rhode island coastal resource management council approval of the project, we indicated that we would install num-one num-txtegawatt turbines in connection with this project.
we project capital investment associated with the full program to be in the $num-one million to $num-two million range over the period of year-eight through num-three.
on [date], pura took major -- took a major step forward in furthering the state's clean energy goals when it approved a comprehensive program to support the state's push for having at least num-one zero emission vehicles on the road by the end of year-ten.