as for our ftxt-num guidance, we are raising our full-year adjusted earnings per share range to $num-one to $num-two to reflect second quarter results and outlook for the second half of the fiscal year as well as the expected benefit from our asr transaction.
while adjusted earnings per share was unchanged year-over-year, this year's effective tax rate was significantly higher as last year's earnings included a $num-one per share discrete tax benefit from favorable guidance issued by the irs.
ground operating income was down approximately $num-one million and in addition to the $num-two million i mentioned earlier, results were significantly affected by higher wage and purchase transportation rates and network inefficiencies amid the constrained labor market.
we delivered strong results for the quarter with an num-one% increase in adjusted operating income, which exceeded our initial expectations shared during the qtr-one call.
ground reported $num-one billion in revenue, a num-two% increase year-over-year, with operating margin at num-three%.
our capital forecast for fiscal year-seven remains at $num-one billion and less than num-two% of anticipated revenue.
fedex freight also delivered a strong quarter with an operating margin of num-one%.
given the historically challenging nature of peak season, along with the continued staffing challenges felt by numerous companies around the world, we are quite pleased with our second quarter consolidated financial results, with adjusted operating income up num-one% year-over-year.
as we anticipated, most of the headwinds we experienced in the first quarter persisted through the second quarter, which dampened our qtr-two profitability by an estimated $num-one million.
we are forecasting that the u.s. domestic parcel market will reach num-one million pieces a day by calendar year num-two, a remarkable num-three% growth from year-five.
second quarter results include outstanding performance by our team at fedex express, where operating income on an as-adjusted basis exceeded $num-one billion for the quarter.
express adjusted operating income increased to over $num-one billion and reported an adjusted operating margin of num-two%, which was driven by higher yields and international priority volume growth, which more than offset the negative effects of continued staffing challenges and covid-related air network inefficiencies.
qtr-two delivered our second consecutive quarter of num-one% revenue growth, demonstrating the strong demand for our differentiated portfolio and our ability to drive revenue quality as a result.
i'm pleased to announce we will be hosting an investor meeting on tuesday and wednesday, num-one, num-two june year-seven in memphis.
qtr-two express international export yield grew num-one% and volume grew num-two%, which is outstanding year-over-year growth.
we estimate the effect of labor shortages on our qtr-two results was approximately $num-one million, in line with our original expectations.