based on our strong performance year-to-date and the expectations for the next couple of months, we are affirming our guidance range of $num-one to $num-two per share, and currently expect to be near the top end of that range.
if decoupling is part of a house bill num-one repeal, we would be closer to the $num-two per share midpoint.
given our current yield of approximately num-one%, we expect to hold our quarterly dividend at $num-two per share or $num-three per share on an annualized basis for next year.
we have updated our funds from operations and free cash flow forecast for year-five, to reflect the impacts of higher storm costs of approximately $num-one million and higher costs associated with the pandemic, including uncollectibles of approximately $num-two million, most of which are deferred for future recovery.
although the events of this past week and the government investigations create additional uncertainty, we are affirming our expected cagr of num-one% to num-two% through year-six and num-three% to num-four% extending through year-eight, along with our plan to issue up to $num-five million in equity annually in year-seven and year-eight.
as steve noted, operating earnings were a $num-one above the top end of our earnings guidance range, largely reflecting the ongoing success of our regulated growth strategy, as well as benefits from weather.
during the course of our internal review related to the ongoing government investigation regarding house bill num-one, the independent review committee of the board determined that three executives violated certain firstenergy policies and its code of conduct.
in the commercial customer class, sales decreased num-one% on a weather-adjusted basis compared to the third quarter of year-four.
in my num-one years with the company, we have faced challenges and changes, and we have always emerged stronger and even more dedicated to our mission.
it includes a $num-one million annual increase in distribution revenues, based on an roe of num-two%.
we remain on pace to complete more than $num-one billion in customer-focused investments across our system this year and our business model and rate structure continue to provide stability.
total residential sales increased num-one% on a weather-adjusted basis compared to the same period last year, as many people continued to work-from-home and spend more time at home due to the pandemic.
in alignment with that policy, our board raised a quarterly payout by $num-one per share for dividends paid in year-four and then by $num-two per share for those paid in year-five.
cooling degree days were approximately num-one% above normal and relatively flat to the third quarter of year-four.
this would represent a num-one% payout ratio to our cagr midpoint for year-six.
with respect to our overall capital programs, for year-six, our capex programs will be at the $num-one billion level and we will consider reductions if necessary.