on a per share basis, first quarter earnings were $num-one compared to a loss per share of $num-two last year and earnings per share of $num-three for the first quarter of year-four.
excluding these items, first quarter non-gaap earnings were $num-one per share, a significant reversal to the loss per share of $num-two for the first quarter of last year and up num-three% compared to earnings per share of $num-four for the first quarter of year-four.
this year's quarter includes pre-tax charges of $num-one million related to the impairment of one of the company's minority investments, and $num-one million primarily related to severance costs in connection with the reorganization of certain support functions.
for the full year, we now expect to open approximately num-one stores, remodel or relocate num-two and close num-three.
and we will continue to enhance our storytelling in qtr-two through our celebration of the num-txth anniversary of the griffey num-one with our nike concept and our second installment of all day i dream about sneakers with adidas.
our comp sales increased num-one% in spite of store closures in europe and canada and supply chain pressures in the u.s. and emea.
on the latter, in addition to our work to advance education and economic opportunities for the black communities we serve, we have also established partnerships with num-one new black-owned brands and creators to provide a platform to showcase their design collaborations this year.
we also closed num-one stores in the quarter, primarily in the u.s., leaving us with num-two company-owned stores at the end of qtr-one.
total sales increased num-one% over last year and num-two% over qtr-one of year-four.
this, coupled with leverage on our sg&a expense, drove a meaningful swing in first quarter earnings per share versus last year's loss and a nearly num-one% increase over qtr-one of year-four.
we anticipate sg&a to be elevated compared to year-five as we lap the unique elements that benefited qtr-two last year, including $num-one million in government subsidies and reduced store operating costs.
for the second quarter, looking at sales, keep in mind that our comps were up nearly num-one% last year in what is historically our lowest volume quarter of the year.
please keep in mind that we face a $num-one million headwind for rent abatements we obtained in qtr-two last year.
we continue to see enrollment increase with over num-one million members now enrolled in the countries where the program is active.
we continue to feel that impact on our business in europe and canada, where roughly num-one stores are temporarily closed.
this funded the opening of num-one new stores as well as the remodeling or relocating of num-two stores.