on a per share basis, second quarter earnings were $num-one compared to earnings per share of $num-two last year and earnings per share of $num-three for the second quarter of year-four.
on a non-gaap basis, earnings were $num-one per share, up over num-two% compared to earnings per share of $num-three for the second quarter of last year and compared to earnings per share of $num-four for the second quarter of year-four.
we expect our non-gaap earnings range to be approximately $num-one to $num-two per share.
during the second quarter of year-six, the company recorded adjustments to earnings, including $num-one million of noncash gains related to our minority investments, of which $num-two million was related to a higher valuation for the company's investment in goat and a $num-three million charge was due primarily to the impairment review of footaction.
we anticipate that accretion on an annualized basis will be in the range of $num-one to $num-two in year-seven.
along with this strong demand, our focus on more full-price selling, combined with our disciplined expense management, yielded non-gaap earnings per share of $num-one, an increase of over num-two%.
we delivered a num-one% comp gain on top of the num-two% gain in the second quarter of last year.
for the full year, we now expect to open approximately num-one stores, remodel or relocate num-two and close num-three.
our digital sales penetration rate was num-one%, normalizing from the peak levels we saw in year-five while remaining well above year-four levels, a trend we expect to continue going forward.
for the second quarter, our global fleet was open for approximately num-one% of possible operating days with temporary closures in canada, certain markets in asia and germany.
in terms of depreciation and amortization expense, we expect it to be approximately $num-one million to $num-two million.
and we have approximately num-one more conversions planned for the back half of the year, along with num-two footaction store closures.
lastly, we expect our full year effective tax rate to be in the range of num-one% to num-two%.
more specifically, in year-seven, we expect that we will begin to generate approximately $num-one million in annualized cost synergies by leveraging our supply chain and operating capabilities.
we also closed num-one stores in the quarter, primarily in the u.s., leaving us with num-two company-owned stores at the end of qtr-two.
but even with the decline in operating days, we saw a num-one% comp increase in our asia markets and a mid-single-digit gain in the pacific region.