our revised adjusted earnings per share guidance is now $num-one to $num-two for year-six.
we are pleased with the performance and solid results in the second quarter, including adjusted earnings per share of $num-one, which represents a num-two% sequential improvement and reflects our continued transformation progress.
based on the combination of our strong first half bookings, driven mostly by shorter-cycle aftermarket and mro activities and visibility into improving end markets, flowserve was pleased to increase our adjusted earnings per share guidance range for the full year to $num-one to $num-two.
our adjusted earnings per share of $num-one, excluded just $num-two of net items, including realignment expenses, the logo line fx charges and a gain on sale of business.
looking at flowserve's second quarter financial results in greater detail, our reported earnings per share of $num-one increased significantly over the prior year period.
these statements are based upon forecasts, expectations and other information available to management as of august num-one, year-six, and they involve risks and uncertainties, many of which are beyond the company's control.
in addition, the quality of our earnings also improved, with after-tax adjusted items declining from $num-one million in the prior year period to just $num-two million this quarter.
our guidance is now for year-six revenues to be num-one% to num-two% down compared to last year versus the prior guidance of down num-three% to num-four%.
we were encouraged by our bookings of $num-one million, which is nearly an num-two% year-over-year improvement.
we saw a modest num-one basis point sequential decrease to num-two%, driven primarily by accounts payable as well as a num-txtay improvement in dso versus the first quarter.
in terms of other guidance metrics, our net interest expense remains unchanged at $num-one million to $num-two million, and we modestly lowered our adjusted tax rate guidance to num-three% to num-four%.
our adjusted earnings per share target range continues to exclude expected realignment expenses of approximately $num-one million as well as below-the-line foreign currency effects and the impact of potential other discrete items which may occur during the year.
in closing, we began our flowserve num-one transformation journey in num-two.
we are pleased with the num-one% year-over-year increase, which brought this quarter's total bookings to $num-two million.
both original equipment and aftermarket bookings grew in the num-one% to num-two% range.
despite our backlog increase of $num-one million, some progress delays due to covid and the proactive purchasing of certain inventory items to mitigate potential supply chain issues, we were pleased that our inventory, including contract assets and liabilities, decreased a modest $num-two million sequentially.