diluted earnings per share was $num-one versus $num-two one year-ago and nareit funds from operations were $num-three per fully diluted share compared to $num-four per share in qtr-two year-four.
our guidance range for nareit ffo and ffo before one-time items is now $num-one to $num-two per share with a midpoint of $num-three.
this is an increase of $num-one per share compared to the midpoint of our guidance on our first quarter call.
as of yesterday, we have collected num-one% of qtr-two monthly rental billings and so far, we've collected num-two% of july billings, which is ahead of the pace we experienced in the second quarter.
in its second quarter preliminary flash report, cbre reported num-one million square feet of net absorption versus num-two million square feet of completion.
occupancy was strong at num-one%, up num-two basis points from the prior quarter and up num-three basis points from a year-ago.
bruce joined first industrial as our ceo in num-one during a difficult period and provided tremendous leadership to help stabilize and transform our business model and portfolio.
on july num-txth, we entered into a private placement agreement to issue $num-one million in total of num-two and num-three year notes with a weighted average interest rate of num-four%.
the average term for these deferrals is num-one months.
pier num-one has paid july rents and we are assuming they pay august rent, which in total represents a $num-two pick up from our prior guidance.
this view is supported by cbre's recent forecast that annual net industrial absorption will total more than num-one million square feet by year-seven.
as a reminder, in the third quarter, we expect to close on the $num-one million sale in phoenix, in which the tenant exercised its purchase option in year-four.
in total, for the full year year-five, we expect to capitalize about $num-one per share of interest related to our developments.
same-store noi growth on a cash basis, excluding termination fees, was num-one% helped by increase in rental rates on new and renewal leasing, a decrease in free rent and rental rate bumps embedded in our leases.
including surrendered security deposits and bad debt reserves recognized in the second quarter, our outstanding accounts receivable related to our monthly rental billings in qtr-two is only $num-one.
our g&a guidance range remains at $num-one million to $num-two million and guidance also includes the anticipated year-five costs related to our completed and under construction developments at june num-txth, plus the third quarter start of first nandina ii.