adjusted earnings per share were $num-one, up num-two% versus the same period last year as strong volume growth, lower sg&a and lower interest expense associated with our debt reduction actions drove higher earnings per share than last year.
last evening, we reported strong fourth quarter results with organic revenue up num-one%, ebitda up num-two% and earnings per share up num-three%.
year-on-year adjusted gross profit margin was num-one%, down num-two basis points versus last year as higher volume was offset by higher variable compensation and unfavorable absorption due to a reduction in inventory.
adjusting for currency, organic revenue was up num-one% with volume up num-two% and pricing having a negative num-three% impact year-on-year in the quarter.
adjusted ebitda for the quarter of $num-one million was up num-two% versus last year and above the high end of our planning assumptions, reflecting strong top line performance, particularly in engineering adhesives.
construction adhesives' ebitda margin was solid at num-one%, down num-two basis points versus last year, reflecting unfavorable mix and an increase in variable compensation accruals as a result of the stronger top line results in the fourth quarter.
capital expenditures are expected to be approximately $num-one million in the year-six fiscal year, and we expect to devote approximately $num-two million of our cash flow after capex investments and dividends to the repayment of debt.
we also realized significant operational benefits from the business realignment completed earlier in the year, which generated $num-one million of annualized sg&a savings in year-five, including $num-two million realized in the fourth quarter, resulting in strong profit growth and operating leverage.
we expect our year-six core tax rate to be between num-one% and num-two% compared to our year-five core tax rate of about num-three%.
based on what we know today, and the planning assumptions that jim laid out earlier, we anticipate full year organic revenue growth to be in the low to mid-single-digits, and ebitda to increase by approximately num-one% as volume leverage, pricing, manufacturing and supply chain savings and carryover of the restructuring-related savings and sg&a offset higher raw material costs, variable compensation rebuild and higher travel expense.
for the quarter, revenue was up num-one% versus the same period last year.
cash flow from operations increased num-one% year-over-year, and enabled us to pay down a total of $num-two million of debt for the year, above our original $num-three million target.
our customer wins continue to grow, and we are still in the process of implementing changes and optimizing the business with a focus now on driving $num-one million to $num-two million of efficiencies across our manufacturing network by the end of year-seven.
engineering adhesives' ebitda margin remained strong at nearly num-one%, down num-two basis points versus last year, reflecting an increase in variable compensation as a result of the stronger top line results in the fourth quarter.
sales growth, improving margins and continued working capital efficiency will enable us to continue to drive strong cash flow and deliver another year of strong debt paydown with a target of paying down another $num-one million of debt in year-six.
revenues increased and margins improved sequentially throughout the year, and in the fourth quarter, we delivered num-one% organic revenue growth with positive organic growth in each of our segments.