for qtr-one total operating revenues were $num-one billion, a decrease of num-two% as compared to the prior quarter.
we expect to post a year-over-year total revenue growth of low to mid single digits in the second quarter, along with more than num-one% adjusted ebitda growth in the second quarter.
digital advertising and marketing services revenues decreased num-one% on the same-store basis reflecting the ongoing impact of the pandemic, as well as cycling against strong comparisons in the first quarter last year.
on the same-store basis operating revenues decreased num-one% as compared with the prior year quarter, due to the continued secular decline in print advertising and home delivery revenue, as well as the continued economic slowdown brought on by the pandemic.
our cash balance at the end of the quarter was $num-one million, resulting in net debt of approximately $num-two billion.
print advertising revenue decreased num-one% compared to the prior year on a same-store basis reflecting the continued sector of pressures as well as the disruption from the pandemic.
adjusted ebitda totaled $num-one million in the quarter, which is up $num-two million or num-two% year-over-year.
we're showing a loss of num-one million on our income statement and we need to put that in perspective given the financing moves that we made in the first quarter, which significantly lower our cash outflows.
however, print advertising revenue continues to show improvement each quarter, with num-one basis points of improvement in qtr-one as compared with the qtr-four trend.
our net loss also reflected $num-one million of depreciation and amortization.
we anticipate that new subscription and product launches in the coming months will accelerate this growth on our path to reach a target of num-one million paid digital only subscriptions in the next five years.
first, for the fourth year in a row, we received a score of num-one on the human rights campaign foundation's corporate equality index.
that negatively impacts the qtr-one same-store trend by approximately num-one basis points.
we had to take a non-cash charge of num-one million on the income statement.
for those that have been following the company for a while now, we refinanced num-one% term loan b with a libor plus num-two term loan b during the quarter, and we also got shareholder approval for our converts issuance which we did in the qtr-four time periods.
circulation revenues decreased num-one% compared to the prior year on the same-store basis, which compares favorably with qtr-four same-store trend of down num-two%.