higher revenue in excess of pre-pandemic levels, combined with sg&a that remains well managed, led to significantly higher operating income versus fiscal year-five, and qtr-one adjusted earnings per share of $num-one compared to $num-two in fiscal year-five.
next, higher operating profit, combined with pre-pandemic share repurchases delivered outstanding qtr-one earnings per share of $num-one, compared with a loss of $num-two last year with positive earnings per share of $num-three two years ago, all on an adjusted basis.
first, revenue and operating profit exceeded pre-pandemic levels, increasing num-one% and num-two%, respectively, over qtr-one fiscal year-five two years ago, even with our stores opened for a little less than num-three% of the possible operating days in the quarter, given closures primarily in the u.k. and canada.
we entered the pandemic year from a position of strength following num-one consecutive quarters of comp sales growth in our footwear businesses.
we closed num-one stores and opened one during the first quarter.
in terms of the specifics for the quarter, consolidated revenue was num-one million, up num-two% compared to fiscal year-five, driven by continued strength in e-commerce, up num-three% versus fiscal year-five combined with strong results from journeys and licensed brands compared to pre-pandemic levels.
directionally, the overall sales increase for qtr-two compared to fiscal year-five could be a little less than the num-one% increase we experienced in qtr-one.
as a reminder, our initial target for this year is to identify savings in operating expenses of num-one million to num-two million or approximately num-three% on an annualized basis.
for comparison purposes, we believe that comparing to two years ago, our pre-pandemic fiscal year-five provides the most meaningful assessment of current performance is there is simply too much noise in fiscal num-one's results for drawing informative comparisons.
the annual tax rate is expected to be approximately num-one%.
this was on top of a num-one% cash rent reduction or num-two% on a straight-line basis for num-three renewals last year.
the announced recovery plan is centered around new product technology and innovation with num-one% of new product development focused on expansion of its casual offering.
in qtr-one this year, we negotiated num-one renewals and achieved a num-two% reduction in cash rent or num-three% on a straight-line basis in north america.
in summary, the first quarter's adjusted operating income was num-one million versus fiscal year-five's num-two million.
during fiscal year-four and year-five, we identified num-one million in expense savings, and in addition, following the divestiture of lids, we eliminated the num-two million stranded costs associated with that business.
on top of this, journeys' online team delivered e-commerce sales that more than doubled pre-pandemic levels as new website visitors increased by almost num-one% and generated close to num-two% of qtr-one online revenue.