third-quarter adjusted class a earnings per share more than doubled to $num-one per share.
we executed with discipline to deliver record quarterly adjusted ebitda of $num-one million and adjusted class a earnings per share of $num-two, fueled by strong volumes and ongoing strategic pricing actions as we continue to experience strong demand across our global portfolio.
at the midpoint, we anticipate generating class a earnings per share of $num-one, which is $num-two per share more than our guide at qtr-two.
we now anticipate generating between $num-one million and $num-two million in adjusted free cash flow, with a bias to the upside of that range.
our leverage ratio fell at num-one times, and our board approved a $num-two and a $num-three increase to our class a and class b quarterly dividend, respectively, payable on [date].
interest expense fell by roughly $num-one million versus the prior-year quarter due to lower debt balances, lower interest rates and a lower interest rate tier on our credit facility as a result of our substantial debt repayment.
given the dramatic improvement in our leverage profile and confidence in strong future cash generation, the board approved a num-one% increase to our quarterly dividend effective this year.
paper packaging's third-quarter sales rose by roughly $num-one million versus the prior year, attributed to stronger volumes and higher selling prices due to increases in published containerboard and boxboard prices.
third-quarter volumes in corrchoice, our corrugated sheet feeder system, were up roughly num-one% per day versus the prior year and are anticipated to stay strong through the fiscal fourth quarter.
our third-quarter gaap and non-gaap tax rate were both num-one% and were flat to prior year.
adjusted ebitda rose by roughly $num-one million versus the prior year due to higher sales, partially offset by higher transportation and raw material headwinds, including a $num-two million occ drag.
third-quarter specialty sales, which includes litho-laminate, triple-wall bulk packaging, and coatings, were up more than num-one% versus the prior year.
also keep in mind that we currently have num-one more shares outstanding now versus the end of year-zero.
we have executed on an aggressive deleveraging plan and repaid $num-one million in total debt since qtr-three year-five.
since early june, we've announced five price increases, including a total of $num-one a ton on crb, $num-two a ton in total on urb, and $num-three a ton on containerboard.
third-quarter net sales, excluding the impact of foreign exchange, rose num-one% versus the prior-year quarter due to stronger volumes and higher selling prices and were a record.