overall sales productivity for our retail stores since reopening for the quarter was down num-one% in the us and canada, down num-two% in europe and down num-three% in asia.
second quarter revenues were $num-one million, down num-two% in us dollars and num-three% in constant currency.
in august, we saw sales productivity at our retail locations of down num-one% in the us and canada, down num-two% in europe and down num-three% in asia.
and as a result, even with sales down over num-one%, we were able to maintain almost breakeven adjusted net earnings and a solid balance sheet.
our e-commerce business in north america and europe delivered high single-digit revenue growth during the second quarter, and gross profit dollars grew more than num-one% as margins improved significantly as a result of increased full price selling and improved imus.
our e-commerce business in north america and europe was up [phonetic] num-one% for the quarter.
we decreased operating expenses by $num-one million, expanded product margins and maintained a very clean inventory position.
at quarter-end, inventories were down num-one%, and we own less clearance inventory than a year ago.
all in all, we reported a num-one% revenue decline, and we almost broke even at the operating level for the period on an adjusted basis.
we still believe that our company is in a strong position to capture the num-one basis points improvement in operating margins that we had targeted last year as most of the improvements are expected to be driven by operational efficiencies that we are confident remain available to us in the near future.
gross margin for the quarter was num-one%, num-two% lower than the prior year.
as the situation began to stabilize during the second quarter, we paid back a significant portion of the borrowings on our drawn revolving lines and seized the opportunity to return incremental value to our shareholders with a $num-one million repurchase of our shares.
we continue to believe that our e-commerce business penetration will grow as a result of this strategic initiative to represent over num-one% of our direct-to-consumer business in three to five years, up from num-two% last year.
this improvement included the nonrecurring payment of last year's $num-one million eu commission fine as well as the adjustments this year to our payment terms with our vendors and unpaid rent to landlords while we finalize negotiations.
michele morrone is a lead actor in the movie, num-one days, one of the top movies of netflix, currently streaming in num-two countries.
adjusted operating loss for the second quarter was $num-one versus a profit of $num-two million last year.