we reported fourth quarter revenue of $num-one million, which was our best quarterly performance ever, an operating margin of num-two% and net income of $num-three per share.
for the year, we had revenue of $num-one million, an operating margin of num-two% and net income of $num-three per share.
and our borrowing cost is currently around num-one% and should remain low, based on market expectations of continued low interest rates and our interest expense should continue to decline in line with our pay down of debt.
our quarterly revenue was up num-one% and earnings per share was up num-two% from the same period last year.
going forward, we continued to expect an effective tax rate of around num-one%, excluding any charge or benefit relating to the impact of share settlements on vesting restricted stock and assuming no major changes in tax laws in the primary places we operate.
we also declared our usual quarterly dividend of $num-one per share.
we ended the year with $num-one million of cash and debt of $num-two million, meaning we had net debt of $num-three million.
our board has authorized $num-one million in repurchases of shares and share equivalents for the year ahead through january year-seven.
for the full year, our revenue was up num-one% and earnings per share was up num-two% from the prior year.
our non-compensation costs were down num-one% from the prior year, despite the fact that we incurred rent expense on two new york headquarters locations for much of the year as we built out new space.
for the quarter, interest expense was $num-one million, as we continue to benefit from low market rates and debt reduction.
our interest expense for the year was $num-one million, well below last year's level, as we benefited from a lower interest rate premium post our refinancing last year, lower market interest rate levels, reduced debt outstanding, and the absence of a refinancing charge.
given the significant opportunities we have found to reduce non-compensation costs, we see increased potential to attain our goal of a num-one% operating margin like we achieved for many years of our history, and that is our goal.
our compensation ratio for the year was num-one%, moderately above our target level as we invested much of our non-compensation savings in rewarding our strong performers in what was the challenging year for all.
it is obviously not the time for celebrations of any kind, but it is worth noting the fact that our firm has proven resilient through numerous challenges over that quarter of a century, the dot com bubble bursting, the [date] terrorist attacks, the financial crisis of num-one and now a major pandemic.
as one example, the rent expense for our headquarters in year-six should be $num-one million less than it was in year-five, given we have both more expensive space and some months of duplication in the year just ended.