third quarter adjusted earnings from continuing operations was $num-one million or $num-two per share, an increase of $num-three versus the same period last year, driven primarily by strong earnings in the airlaid segment and a favorable tax rate for the quarter.
we reported adjusted earnings per share of $num-one and adjusted ebitda of $num-two million.
slide-num shows a bridge of adjusted earnings per share of $num-one from the third quarter of last year to this year's third quarter of $num-two.
we also experienced sequential volume growth of num-one% in our hygiene products category after being negatively affected in the first half of the year as consumers destocked.
for the two remaining months of the fourth quarter under glatfelter's ownership, we expect shipments to total approximately num-one metric tons and operating profit to be approximately $num-two million.
selling prices are expected to be $num-one million higher versus qtr-three of year-six.
selling prices are expected to be higher, but fully offset by higher raw material prices and energy prices are expected to unfavorably impact profitability by $num-one million to $num-two million compared to the third quarter.
our near-term priorities for this acquisition will be focused on successfully integrating jacob holm into glatfelter's operating model, achieving the targeted $num-one million of annual synergies and actively de-levering the balance sheet.
airlaid materials results increased earnings by $num-one, primarily due to strong volume recovery in wipes and tabletop product categories, as well as from the addition of a full quarter of mount holly results.
composite fibers results lowered earnings by $num-one, driven primarily by higher inflationary pressures experienced in raw materials, energy, logistics and operations.
for the third quarter, corporate costs were favorable by $num-one million when compared to the same period last year, driven by continued spend control.
depreciation and amortization expense is projected to be approximately $num-one million including jacob holm.
for the fourth quarter of year-six, we expect shipments to be num-one% lower on a sequential basis with unfavorable mix, thereby impacting operating profit by $num-two million.
revenues were up about num-one% versus the prior year quarter on a constant currency basis, supported by the addition of a full quarter of mount holly and strong recovery in the tabletop and wipes categories.
we expect the fourth quarter tax rate to be approximately num-one%, while our full-year year-six tax rate is estimated to be between num-two% and num-three%, in line with our previous guidance.
our leverage ratio decreased to num-one times as of [date], year-six versus num-two times at the end of june, but higher compared to year-end year-five, mainly driven by the mount holly acquisition.