net sales were $num-one billion for the quarter, compared to $num-two billion in the fourth quarter of year-five and $num-three billion in the fourth quarter of year-four.
we reported a net loss of $num-one million, or $num-two per diluted share, compared to a net income of $num-three million, or income per diluted share of $num-four in the prior-year fourth quarter.
sg&a was $num-one million for the quarter or num-two% of sales, compared to $num-three million or num-four% of sales in last year's fourth quarter.
for the full year, net sales were $num-one billion, compared to $num-two billion for fiscal year year-five.
we entered into a partnership with immutable x that is intended to support the development of our nft marketplace and provide up to $num-one million in imx tokens upon achievement of certain milestones.
we grew powerup rewards pro members by num-one% on a year-over-year basis, taking total membership to approximately num-two million.
for the full year, sg&a was $num-one billion, compared to $num-two billion for the last fiscal year.
we had a net loss of $num-one million for fiscal year year-six, relative to $num-two million for fiscal year year-five.
we recognize that our special connectivity with gamers provides us a unique opportunity in the web num-one and digital asset world.
with that said, here is a brief recap of what changed in fiscal year year-six: we installed a new management team comprised of technology veterans and introduced a more equity-focused executive compensation structure to increase alignment with stockholders; we refreshed the board with stockholders and individuals who possess records of value creation, while reducing individual director compensation; we ended relationships with high-priced external consultants who were costing the company millions of dollars per year; we hired hundreds of new individuals with e-commerce, operations and technology experience, while eliminating many redundant and unnecessary roles; we recapitalized the company's balance sheet after raising approximately $num-one billion in capital; we expanded our product catalog to seize more market share in areas such as pc gaming, personal electronics and virtual reality; we invested in our fulfillment network by standing up new facilities on the east coast in york, pennsylvania, and on the west coast in reno, nevada; we invested in our systems and tech stack after years of decay and neglect; we invested in u.s.-based customer service and established a new facility in south florida; we invested in a dedicated blockchain team and new capabilities to drive the development of initiatives such as our nft marketplace, which we expect to launch by the end of the second quarter; we see significant long-term potential in the more than $num-two billion market for nfts.
capital expenditures for the quarter were $num-one million, bringing full-year capex to $num-two million.
this helped grow our pc gaming sales by num-one% for the full year.
we ended the year with $num-one million in inventory, compared to $num-two million at the close of fiscal year year-five.
in the fourth quarter, cash flow from operations was an outflow of $num-one million, compared to an inflow of $num-two million during the same period last year.
at the end of the year, we had no borrowings under our abl facility and no debt other than a $num-one million low-interest, unsecured term loan associated with the french government's response to covid.
we finished the year with cash and cash equivalents of over $num-one billion, roughly $num-two million higher than the company's cash position at the close of last year.