earnings per share was $num-one per diluted per share compared to a net loss of $num-two per share in the year-ago quarter.
consolidated revenue in the second quarter increased by $num-one million to $num-two million.
ges recorded an impairment of $num-one in the second quarter related to the writedown of an asset impacting income from operations but not adjusted ebitda.
at genie retail energy, revenue increased by $num-one million to $num-two million.
globally, our retail energy provider businesses which generated num-one% of our revenue added num-two rces year-over-year and num-three sequentially to reach num-four rces with solid growth in both our domestic and international markets.
as a result, gross meter adds decreased to num-one this quarter from num-two in the prior quarter and from num-three in the year-ago quarter.
gre's churn rate decreased to num-one% in the second quarter from num-two% in the first quarter.
overseas, at genie retail energy international, revenue increased by $num-one million dollars to $num-two million reflecting meter base growth at lumo and scandinavia and genie japan.
during the quarter, we provided orbit with an additional $num-one million of capital, resulting in a net loss of orbit energy of that amount compared to a net loss of $num-two a year ago quarter.
cash provided by operating activities in the second quarter was $num-one million compared to cash used in operating activities of $num-two million in the second quarter of year-four.
electricity consumption increased num-one% from the year-ago quarter, more than offsetting a modest decrease in revenue per kilowatt hours sold.
these factors combined to increase electric per meter consumption by num-one% compared to the year-ago quarter.
our genie energy services division increased revenue by $num-one to $num-two million.
meters served increased by num-one year-over-year and num-two sequentially to num-three meters.
global meters served increased by num-one year-over-year and num-two sequentially to num-three.
consolidated gross profit in the second quarter, more than doubled from the year-ago quarter increasing by $num-one million to $num-two million.