enact reported very strong results with adjusted operating income of num-one million compared with num-two million in the prior quarter and an adjusted operating loss of num-three million in the prior-year period.
we reported adjusted operating income of num-one million in the quarter, which compared to adjusted operating income of num-two million in the prior quarter and an adjusted operating loss of num-three million in the prior year.
relative to the prior quarter, enact reported higher new insurance written, lower earned premiums and a num-one% decrease in new delinquencies.
for the second quarter, enact reported adjusted operating income of num-one million and a loss ratio of num-two% compared to adjusted operating income of num-three million and a loss ratio of num-four% in the prior quarter.
new delinquencies of approximately num-one during the quarter were down num-two% sequentially with num-three% reported in new forbearance plants.
in fixed annuities, adjusted operating earnings of num-one million for the quarter was lower compared to the prior quarter and prior year, primarily from lower mortality and single premium immediate annuities and unfavorable impact from the decline in interest rates during the quarter.
in long-term care, adjusted operating income was num-one million in the second quarter compared to num-two million in the prior quarter and num-three million in the prior year.
one, reduce our holding company debt to approximately num-one billion.
results were primarily driven by ltc insurance, which reported adjusted operating income of num-one million, reflecting higher earnings from in-force rate actions, including benefit reductions related to a legal settlement and higher net investment income versus both the prior quarter and the prior year.
u.s. life insurance reported adjusted operating income of num-one million for the quarter compared with num-two million in the prior quarter and an adjusted operating loss of num-three million in the prior year.
new insurance written in enact was num-one billion in the quarter, up num-two% versus the prior quarter, driven primarily by a larger purchase origination market and down num-three% versus the prior year, primarily driven by lower estimated market share.
as of the second quarter, the pre-tax balance of this reserve was num-one million, up from num-two million as of year-end year-five.
additionally, we released num-one million of ibnr reserves related to june delinquencies that have not yet been reported by services to us and which we expect will be lower than had been assumed in our prior ibnr reserves.
included in net income for the quarter was num-one million in non-operating items, mostly consisting of mark-to-market increases on limited partnerships in our investment portfolio.
once our parent debt level reaches approximately num-one billion, we'll be in a better position to return capital to shareholders and make prudent investments in future growth.
results reflected a loss ratio of num-one%, which compares favorably to the prior quarter due to lower losses from new delinquencies and higher reserve strengthening in the prior quarter.