we believe that we are well positioned to fill our customer volume commitments for year-six of approximately num-one to num-two million short tons through a combination of existing coal inventory of num-three million short tons and expected production during the rest of the year.
non gaap adjusted net income for the first quarter, excluding that non cash charge for tax valuation allowance was eight cents per diluted share, compared to num-one cents per diluted share in the same quarter of year-five.
the company record a net loss on a gaap basis of approximately $num-one million, or a loss of num-two cents per diluted share, compared to net income of $num-three million or num-two cents per diluted share in the same quarter last year.
at this point, the price started its gradual decline, hitting its low of $num-one per metric ton in late march.
sales volume in the first quarter was num-one million short tons compared to num-two million short tons in the same quarter last year.
our sales by geography for the fourth quarter were num-one% into europe num-two% into south america, and num-three% into asia.
as planned and previously communicated, inventories remained elevated at the end of the first quarter compared to pre pandemic levels, call inventory levels increased to num-one times to num-two million short times at the end of the first quarter.
the world steel association has reported a num-one% increase in global pig production for the first quarter, with china leading the charge with a year over year increase of num-two%.
we saw the australian index price climb from its low of $num-one per metric ton at the start of the year, and peak at a high of $num-two per metric ton in late january.
excluding china the rest of the world grew at a more moderate pace of num-one%.
the merge and other charges reduced our gross price realization to an average net selling price of $num-one per short term in the first quarter of year-six, compared to $num-two per short term in the same quarter last year.
our gross price realization for the first quarter of year-six was num-one% of the platts premium lowball fob australian index price and was higher than the num-two% achieved in the prior year period.
production volume in the first quarter of year-six was num-one million short tons, compared to a similar amount in the same quarter of last year.
compared to the same quarter last year, the index price averaged $num-one per metric ton for the quarter.
the slight increase in total dollars was primarily due to higher sales volume, offset by lower variable cost and a focus on controlling cost of sales per short ton fob port was approximately $num-one in the first quarter compared to $num-two in the same period of year-five.
cost of sales was $num-one million, or num-two% of mining revenues in the first quarter, compared to $num-three million, or num-four% of mining revenues in the same quarter of year-five.