we expect net production to build in the second half of the year and forecast year-six exit rate of between num-one barrels and num-two barrels of oil equivalent per day.
company wide second quarter net production is forecast to average between num-one barrels and num-two barrels of oil equivalent per day.
full year year-six net production is now also expected to average between num-one barrels and num-two barrels of oil equivalent per day, compared to our previous forecast of approximately num-three barrels of oil equivalent per day.
for the full year year-six, we maintain our guidance for gulf of mexico net production to average approximately num-one barrels of oil equivalent per day, reflecting planned maintenance downtime and natural field declines.
in the deepwater gulf of mexico, first quarter net production averaged num-one barrels of oil equivalent per day, reflecting strong operations following hurricane recovery in late year-five.
dd&a expense excluding libya is forecast to be in the range of $num-one per barrel to $num-two per barrel of oil equivalent for the second quarter.
for the second quarter, we now forecast net production to average between num-one barrels and num-two barrels of oil per day.
e&p had net income of $num-one million in the first quarter of year-six, compared to an adjusted net loss of $num-two million in the previous quarter.
in the gulf of thailand, net production in the first quarter was num-one barrels of oil equivalent per day as natural gas nominations continue to increase due to strong economic growth.
second quarter and full year year-six net production are forecast to average approximately num-one barrels of oil equivalent per day.
we had net income of $num-one million in the first quarter of year-six, compared to an adjusted net loss of $num-two million, which excluded an after-tax gain of $num-three million from an asset sale in the fourth quarter of year-five.
and for the full year year-six, between num-one barrels and num-two barrels of oil equivalent per day.
in the second quarter, we forecast that gulf of mexico net production will average approximately num-one barrels of oil equivalent per day.
and full-year guidance of $num-one million to num-two million is unchanged.
bakken net production in the first quarter averaged num-one barrels of oil equivalent per day, which was below our guidance of approximately num-two barrels of oil equivalent per day.
and $num-one per barrel of oil equivalent, excluding libya in the first quarter.