with this strong and consistent free cash flow generation, we've seen an increase to our cash balance of num-one% over year-five and more than three times that of year-four.
our cash flow from operations at $num-one million and free cash flow of $num-two million were the second highest.
greens creek had another strong year as the mine produced num-one million ounces at an all-in sustaining costs of $num-two per ounce, which was below our lower end of guidance at $num-three per silver ounce.
silver cash costs are expected to be in the range of seventy $num-one to $num-two per ounce while the silver all-in sustaining cost guidance is $num-three to $num-four per ounce.
in year-six, production was a num-one% increase over year-five.
now adding a strong lucky friday in year-six led to a record financial year with revenues of $num-one million and adjusted ebitda of $num-two million.
you can see all our minds generate positive free cash flow, and companywide, we generated more than num-one million in free cash flow during year-six, which was the second highest in the company's history.
record revenues, coupled with high margins, generated record adjusted ebitda for the year of $num-one million, resulting in our leverage ratio being num-two times, which is significantly below our target of two times.
all-in sustaining costs for the year were $num-one per ounce in line with our guidance.
well, if you look at the history of the mine, lucky friday has never had sustained production about num-one million ounces.
as a result of our consistent and strong operational performance, our balance sheet has continued to strengthen as we entered the year with $num-one million in cash and excess of $num-two million of liquidity.
silver production guidance for year-seven is num-one million to num-two million ounces as we will be mining lower grades for the production sequence.
cash flow from operations was $num-one million and free cash flow was $num-two million, and those were the second highest in our history.
our third message is that on the esg front, hecla stands out with the safety record of our employees that is num-one% below the national average, and we are also net neutral on greenhouse gas emissions for scope num-two and num-three because we have among the smallest emissions in our industry.
turning to slide-num, as phil noted earlier, we generated record revenue of more than $num-one million, of which silver contributed num-two% while gold contributed num-three%.
and so i'd encourage you to look at section num-one as section num-two.