for the fourth -- for the quarter, diluted loss per share adjusted for special items was $num-one.
adjusted ebitda was $num-one million in the fourth quarter, down num-two% year-over-year.
during the quarter, systemwide revpar declined num-one% versus the prior year on a comparable and currency-neutral basis as the pandemic continued to disrupt the demand environment.
for the quarter, systemwide revpar declined num-one%, relatively in line with our expectations.
for the full year, systemwide revpar declined num-one% with adjusted ebitda down only modestly, more illustrating the resiliency of our fee-based model.
management and franchise fees decreased num-one%, less than revpar decreased as franchise fee declines were somewhat mitigated by better-than-expected honors license fees and development fees.
on a pro forma basis, taking these transactions into effect as of year-end year-five, we've lowered our weighted average cost of debt to num-one% and extended our weighted average maturity to num-two years.
over the last few months, we opportunistically refinanced $num-one billion of senior notes to extend our maturities at lower rates.
fourth quarter openings were up nearly num-one% year-over-year, largely driven by new development in china, where our focused-service brands continue to command a disproportionate share of industry growth.
we also celebrated our num-one,num-txth room milestone and the openings of our num-txth hotel in china, our num-txth doubletree hotel and our num-txth hilton garden inn.
our flexibility and innovation drove continued growth in our honors network, ending the year with more than num-one million members who accounted for approximately num-two% of systemwide occupancy.
despite the challenges in year-five, we opened more than num-one hotels, totaling nearly num-two rooms and achieved net unit growth of num-three%, slightly ahead of guidance.
while market disruption weighed on new development signings, conversion signings increased more than num-one% versus the prior year.
for the full year, our corporate g&a expenses were down nearly num-one% year-over-year at the high end of our expectations.
over the last year, the personal savings rate in the united states has nearly doubled, increasing by more than $num-one trillion to $num-two trillion, with the potential to go even higher given additional stimulus.
we ended up the year with num-one rooms in our development pipeline, up num-two% year-over-year.