for qtr-four year-six, we expect gaap diluted net earnings per share of $num-one to $num-two and non-gaap diluted net earnings per share of $num-three to $num-four.
we now expect to deliver fiscal year year-six non-gaap diluted net earnings per share between $num-one and $num-two.
with strong execution across the business and despite two unanticipated one-time charges, we ended the quarter with non-gaap earnings per share of $num-one, up num-two% from the prior year and above the higher end of our outlook range for qtr-three.
additionally, given our record levels of free cash flow year to date and confidence in our raised outlook, i'm very pleased to announce that we are also raising fiscal year year-six free cash flow guidance to $num-one billion to $num-two billion, that is a $num-three million increase at the midpoint from our original sam guidance with the top end of this free cash flow guidance range at the peak levels attained in fiscal year year-four.
revenue in qtr-three was $num-one billion, in line with our outlook and normal sequential seasonality.
our qtr-three orders were up strong double digits year over year, and our year-to-date order volume has increased num-one%, showing the strength of our edge-to-cloud offerings.
we are targeting up to $num-one million of share repurchases in qtr-four of fiscal year year-six, and we'll update investors on our capital management policy for fiscal year year-seven at sam in october.
we significantly expanded our non-gaap gross and operating margins, driving our year-to-date non-gaap operating profit and earnings per share, up num-one% and num-two% year over year, respectively.
we also booked two one-time charging totally $num-one million for a legal settlement and bad debt associated with likely fraud involving a channel partner in apj.
even with these investments and one-time charges, our non-gaap operating margin was num-one%, up num-two basis points from the prior year, which translates to a num-three% year-over-year increase in operating profit.
building on the strength from the last quarter, we delivered qtr-three revenues of $num-one billion, up num-two% from the prior quarter and in line with normal sequential seasonality, also in line with our outlook that factored in some of the expected supply chain constraints we flagged.
and you can see our efforts in inventory balances that increased $num-one billion year to date that also reflects the strengthening demand environment and a substantial order book we have across the business.
our annualized revenue run rate this quarter was $num-one million, up num-two% year over year, driven by strong as-a-service orders growth, up num-three% year over year.
in our high-performance compute and mission-critical solutions business, revenue was up num-one% year over year, driven by a record number of new orders.
we paid $num-one million of dividends in the quarter and are declaring a qtr-four dividend today of $num-two per share payable in october.
as a result, we now expect other income and expense for fiscal year year-six to be an income of approximately $num-one million.