we announced another potash price increase in february, up $num-one per ton, increasing our posted potash prices $num-two per ton above summer fill levels.
we expect our net realized sales price will increase to approximately num-one to $num-two per ton in the first quarter and num-two to $num-three per ton in the second quarter of year-six.
we recorded fourth quarter adjusted ebitda of $num-one million, an increase of over $num-two million compared to the third quarter of year-five.
all said, we expect our net realized pricing to increase from $num-one per ton in the fourth quarter of year-five to num-two to $num-three per ton for the second quarter of year-six, with the first-quarter net realized sales price about halfway between the two.
customers look to replenish potash inventories after a strong fall application season that was evidenced by the num-one tons of potash sold in the quarter up significantly from the prior year.
our posted price is now up $num-one per ton compared to the summer fill levels, and we are seeing good subscription at current pricing into the spring.
trio has also seen strong demand and has currently posted $num-one per ton higher than the summer fill values.
looking toward year-six, we still expect first half potash volumes to exceed prior year by about num-one% to num-two% despite the large volumes in the fourth quarter.
total water sales, including byproducts, were $num-one million in qtr-four an increase of $num-two million compared to the third quarter of year-five.
we expect additional wells can be added as demand and volume commitments require at a cost of approximately $num-one million each.
we expect to produce water well will cost approximately $num-one million and will complete incremental capital for the surface facility at the appropriate time.
with a strong early start to the spring season, our cash position today is $num-one million with no change in our outstanding debt from year-end.
total capital for our first well and surface facilities is estimated at $num-one million.
year-five capital investment ended the year at $num-one million.
we estimate year-six capital investment of num-one to num-two million, of which num-three to num-four million will be sustaining capital with the remainder as potential opportunity capital projects.
cash flow from operations was $num-one million in the fourth quarter and $num-two million for the full year.