free cash flow for the quarter was $num-one million, yielding total liquidity of $num-two billion at quarter end, up approximately $num-three billion from qtr-one as we received the gross proceeds from both divestitures in qtr-two.
total company orders and revenue increased year-over-year num-one% and num-two%, respectively, with strong double-digit organic orders growth across each segment.
the company delivered second quarter adjusted ebitda of $num-one million, a year-over-year improvement of $num-two million and adjusted ebitda margin of num-three%, a num-four basis point improvement year-over-year.
we have launched aggressive num-one and num-two goals and improve our new product development process to address these goals.
overall, organic orders were up num-one% and revenue up num-two%, leading to a book-to-bill of num-three.
finally, corporate costs came in at $num-one million for the quarter, up year-over-year, primarily due to higher incentive compensation costs as well as targeted commercial growth investments in areas like demand generation and other targeted strategic investments.
overall, we posted a strong book-to-bill of num-one for the quarter, an improvement from the prior year level of num-two.
with these two acquisitions, we're expecting to add approximately $num-one billion to pst addressable market, which is an impressive num-two% expansion.
this takes our net leverage to num-one times, a num-two times improvement from qtr-one.
due to the funnel we have built that stands in excess of $num-one million and strong execution, we are reaffirming our stated $num-two million cost savings target.
and we are very pleased with the momentum we are seeing as organic orders in qtr-two were up num-one% and num-two% on a quarter-to-date and year-to-date basis, respectively, as compared to year-four.
we have focus and deliver on diversity within our board and extended leadership team, which is now num-one% and num-two%, respectively.
we expect a cumulative num-one% to num-two% up to $num-three million in savings by the end of year-seven with the balance coming in year-eight.
the company delivered $num-one million of adjusted ebitda, which was an increase of num-two% versus prior year.
at its current state, the funnel size remains approximately num-one times the size it was versus qtr-two of year-five, with average revenue larger and velocity accelerating minutely.
our $num-one per share offer was pre-emptive, and fully accounted for spx flow's investor day plan, which is ahead of consensus estimates.