as a result of the revenue growth and margin expansion, itt delivered adjusted earnings per share of $num-one, growing num-two% and surpassing our pre-covid adjusted earnings per share levels in qtr-two year-four.
revenue increased num-one% to $num-two million.
the increased sales volume and strong productivity expected in year-six will generate adjusted earnings per share in the range of $num-one to $num-two at the high end, which equates to num-three% to num-four% growth versus prior year.
our revised adjusted earnings per share guidance reflects an $num-one improvement at the midpoint of our range, eclipsing year-four levels and our previous high end.
reported earnings per share decreased num-one% to $num-two, driven primarily by a $num-three million after-tax loss on the divestiture of intelco management llc, formerly a wholly owned subsidiary that holds legacy asbestos liabilities and related insurance assets, as well as prior-year income tax benefits, and increased corporate and environmental costs.
segment operating income increased num-one% [phonetic] to $num-two million, which equates to segment operating margin of num-three%.
we now anticipate organic revenue growth will be num-one% to num-two% for the year, a num-three basis point increase on both the low- and high-end of our already increased guidance from the first quarter.
additionally, we are raising our adjusted free cash flow guidance by $num-one million at the low- and high-ends of our previous range to reflect the higher operating income generated in the first half, offset by further working capital investments to support future growth, especially given the supply chain disruptions we are experiencing today.
as you will see on slide-num, our revised guidance assuming the incremental impact from this trend will be $num-one at the high-end for the remainder of year-six.
building on the first quarter momentum, our connectors business in connect and control technologies grew sales by num-one% organically, after num-two% organic in qtr-one.
despite the margin challenges in qtr-three, we still expect all three businesses to be up over num-one basis points for the full year, which will eclipse itt's segment margin for year-four.
and we continue to expect a num-one% reduction in the weighted average share count, given our share repurchases to date.
in the meantime, we're seeing continued momentum in weekly run rates in our short-cycle businesses in industrial process and connectors, which we believe will drive organic revenue growth to a new range of num-one% to num-two% for the year.
this is an $num-one improvement at the midpoint, after a $num-two increase after the first quarter, and this puts itt on pace to comfortably surpass year-three adjusted earnings per share despite significant inflationary pressure.
our outlook for adjusted segment margin remains at approximately num-one% at the midpoint.
in cct, we drove nearly num-one% organic revenue growth in industrial connectors, mainly through distribution, continuing the momentum we saw in the first quarter.