based on our visibility into the third quarter, we are reaffirming our full year guidance for year-six, consisting our constant currency net sales growth in the range of num-one%, adjusted ebitda of $num-two million and free cash flow of $num-three million.
i'm pleased to announce that we achieved constant currency net sales growth of num-one%, with increases in all key product categories.
constant currency net sales increased num-one% driven by double-digit growth in both mobility and seating and respiratory products.
reported net sales increased num-one%, with growth in all product categories and in all regions.
gross profit increased $num-one million due to strong revenue growth and favorable sales mix, offset by supply chain-related plant disruptions and higher freight costs, resulting in flat gross margin.
importantly, mobility and seating products rebounded strongly at constant currency net sales growth of nearly num-one% in europe and over num-two% in north america.
north america achieved constant currency net sales growth of num-one%, driven by increased revenues in all product categories.
as a result of revenue growth, the company had higher receivable, which led to an increase of num-one days in sales outstanding as compared to the end of the first quarter of year-six, impacted by the timing of collections from revenue recognized in the quarter.
gross profit increased $num-one million due to higher revenue and the benefit of favorable sales mix.
reported net sales in all product lines improved year-over-year despite supply chain challenge, which limited the conversion of orders for shipments and resulted in excess order backlog of $num-one million, primarily in europe.
mobility and seating products generating constant currency net sales growth of num-one% and respiratory products grew by num-two%.
driven by higher net sales, operating income increased by $num-one million.
europe constant currency net sales increased num-one% driven by an num-two% growth in mobility and seating and over num-three% increase in lifestyle products, partially offset by lower sales of respiratory products.
operating loss increased by $num-one million, primarily due to lower profitability in the asia pacific region impacted by lower net sales favorable gross margin and higher sg&a expense.
we ended the second quarter with $num-one million of higher backlog than normal, similar to the level at the end of the first quarter.
constant currency net sales in the asia pac region decreased num-one% due to lower sales in lifestyle and mobility and seating products partially offset by growth in respiratory products.