additionally, we expect another year of strong earnings growth, with adjusted earnings per share in the range of $num-one to $num-two, which represents year-over-year growth of num-three% to num-four%.
we exited the year with service revenues up num-one% in the fourth quarter with high single-digit growth in all three regions in nearly all business domains.
although we expect to remain price/cost positive on an earnings per share basis, the inflated level of pricing will result in margin headwinds of approximately num-one basis points for the year.
corporate was a $num-one headwind year-over-year and other items netted to a $num-two tailwind, primarily related to lower share count, lower net financing charges and fx.
eps of $num-one was at the high end of our guidance range and increased num-two% year-over-year, benefiting from higher profitability as well as lower share count.
with an estimated $num-one billion in government stimulus earmarked for k-num-two spending, this provides a significant opportunity.
underlying margins are expanding to num-one to num-two basis points.
on a full year basis, we expect high single-digit organic revenue growth, with num-one to num-two basis points of segment ebita margin expansion.
for the full year, service revenue grew num-one%, which is up two to three points over year-four levels, despite a slow start to the year as we manage through lingering site access restrictions and abnormal customer budget pressures.
as you can see, qtr-one typically represents less than num-one% of our full year earnings per share given our normal seasonality.
as planned, we launched over num-one new products in fiscal year-six, spanning nearly all business units, resulting in continued share gains in both qtr-four and the full year.
over the last num-one months, we have strengthened our market-leading capabilities to best position ourselves for the shifting industry demographics and evolving digital technologies that are enabling outcome-based solution models.
service orders were up num-one% in qtr-four and, importantly, up low single digits organically versus year-four levels.
for qtr-one of fiscal year-seven, we expect to be above that level, with qtr-one guidance representing about num-one% of our full year at the midpoint.
segment ebita increased num-one% versus the prior year, margin expanding num-two basis points to num-three%.
north america revenue grew num-one% organically, led by strength in services, which was higher in all domain.