for kar overall, we generated $num-one million in revenue, which was a decline of num-two% from qtr-three of last year.
we generated a total gross profit of $num-one million, representing num-two% of revenue, excluding purchased vehicles.
that represented an increase of num-one% compared to kar's total dealer volume in qtr-three of last year.
revenue per loan transaction was also higher, num-one% higher than qtr-three of last year, at $num-two for the quarter.
within that, our total commercial volume was down by num-one% versus qtr-three of last year and our total dealer consigned volume actually increased by num-two%.
now, these volumes are down num-one% versus qtr-three of last year.
in terms of dealer-to-dealer, we are growing our volume with our combined digital and physical volume up num-one% versus the same quarter last year.
the average selling price in our commercial off-premise segment primarily openly was $num-one in the third quarter compared to $num-two per vehicle in the third quarter of year-five.
as i mentioned, commercial seller volumes were down by num-one% versus the same quarter last year.
digital dealer-to-dealer representing backlotcars and traderev had an average sale price of $num-one in qtr-three compared to $num-two last year.
some of that increase is driven by the acquisition of backlotcars, but i'm pleased that we were able to increase our overall volume by num-one%, given the tight supply dynamics that exist across our industry.
this was driven in part by strong auction revenue per vehicle sold and is higher than the gross profit per vehicle generated in the first half of this year and num-one% greater than the same statistic from qtr-three of last year.
this was an increase of num-one% versus the same quarter last year and it was in line with the levels that we'd expect.
so first of all, if we look at our total dealer consignment volumes at kar, and by which i mean digital and physical combined, we sold num-one dealer consigned vehicles in the third quarter.
even though gross profit per unit at adesa was $num-one, the gross profit as a percent of revenue, excluding purchased vehicles, declined to num-two% in qtr-three as compared to the prior year's num-three% gross profit.
so, we are well on our way toward achieving the target that i established in -- on our analyst day of num-one million digital dealer-to-dealer transactions annually by year-ten.