we produced total revenues of $num-one billion, up nearly num-two% as compared to the prior year period and diluted earnings per share of $num-three.
overall, we reported net income for the third quarter of $num-one million or $num-two per diluted share, compared to $num-three million or $num-four per diluted share for the prior year period.
considering our quarter-end backlog, the status of our homes under construction and expected construction cycle times, we anticipate our fourth quarter housing revenues will be in the range of $num-one billion to $num-two billion.
for purchases of calculating diluted earnings per share, we estimate a weighted average share count of $num-one million for the year-six fourth quarter and $num-two million for the full year.
assuming no inventory related charges, we believe our fourth quarter housing gross profit margins will be in the range of num-one% to num-two%, reflecting the impact of peak lumber prices when our forecasted fourth quarter whole deliveries were started.
net orders were num-one, represented a small decline year-over-year, against the strong results in the prior year quarter.
we achieved an operating income margin of num-one% excluding inventory related charges, which grew num-two basis points year-over-year, driving a num-three% expansion in our profitability per unit to nearly num-four.
for the fourth quarter, we are projecting an overall average selling price of approximately $num-one, which would represent a year-over-year increase of num-two%.
our monthly absorption per community accelerated to num-one net orders during the third quarter from num-two in the year ago quarter and reflecting a more typical seasonal pattern sequentially, while remaining at historically elevated level.
our third quarter homebuilding operating income improved to $num-one million as compared to $num-two million in the year-earlier quarter.
these repurchases will further enhance our return on equity in year-seven beyond this year's expected num-one% level, especially when combined with our projected increase in scale to over $num-two billion in revenue and higher operating and gross margins.
our housing revenues grew to $num-one billion for the quarter from $num-two million for the prior year period.
for year-seven, we are forecasting housing revenues of over $num-one billion, supported by our anticipated year-six year-end backlog, community count growth and an ongoing strong demand environment throughout next year.
we anticipate a return on equity this year of about num-one% and further expansion in year-seven, supported by double-digit growth in revenues and community count, with higher margins, as well as our recent share repurchase.
with the rise in our net order value to $num-one billion, we are laying the foundation for future margin growth.
in the third quarter, our overall average selling price of homes delivered rose to approximately $num-one from approximately $num-two, reflecting the strength of the housing market.