you'll recall that we stated that first half versus second half would be circa num-one-num-two split at the earnings per share level.
revenues of $num-one billion and $num-two million of adjusted ebitda are right in line with our fiscal year-six guide of $num-three billion top-line and num-four% ebitda margin.
as mark will show you in a moment sustainable technology has come out of the gate strong in qtr-one, and we remain confident in delivering our year-six guide that they will be a business that do sucker $num-one billion in revenue, likely a bit more and with ebitda margins in the mid teens, the high-end government business is a sustainable tech kicker.
now remember that guidance reflects a num-one% plus increase in adjusted earnings per share from a very, very resilient num-one actual.
net leverage edged down just one tick driven from growth in ebitda to num-one and in case you missed it we bumped up our dividend for the second year in a row now at $num-two per quarter, up num-three% from the year-five dividend level.
in qtr-one, we had excellent execution, especially in sustainable technology and this combined with qtr-one bookings has driven the level of secured revenue closer to num-one% eight zero percent.
it is worth noting that the book-to-bill of heritage technology was num-one in the quarter.
that has now shifted to the circa num-one-num-two split with a couple of things happening in qtr-one, that were expected to happen in qtr-two and qtr-three.
as an aside, and his team in australia are off to another good start, posting top organic growth rates again at over num-one% year-on-year this quarter.
cash was once again very strong out of the gate with free cash flow conversion coming in at num-one% for the quarter.
now you should all be very familiar with those zero harm sustainability program by now under num-one pillars that fit within it across the esg spectrum.
free cash conversion at over num-one% was again strong and importantly the team brought and over $num-two billion in backlog and options during the quarter in high-end technical top market areas increasing our total backlog with options to $num-three billion more on some of these wins in a moment, but super exciting.
as i'll cover later, we did have some acceleration of profit in the first quarter, which were modestly relate our first half to second half earnings more toward the num-one%, num-two% mix versus our initial guide of num-three%, num-four%, but the bottom line here is, we are on track on all measures and thus reaffirming our guidance for the year.
we're confident as i said earlier, our full year guide of revenue and $num-one billion plus zip code and margins in the mid-teens will be attained.
the team has done a nice job across the customer set picking over $num-one billion in awards and options in the quarter, a pleasing result and a typically like bookings quarter.
the circa num-one% eight zero percent of the work secured to deliver our year-six guide under the strong qtr-one now behind us, we are very confident of delivering year-six and we reaffirm that guidance today.