our non-gaap earnings per share of $num-one is down from $num-two in qtr-one last year, due primarily to the additional shares issued in the combination, partially offset by the inclusion of houghton and norman hay.
on a pro forma basis, as if houghton was also in qtr-one of year-four, net sales were down num-one%, which reflects negative impacts from lower volumes and foreign exchange, partially offset by additional sales from norman hay.
in non-operating items, we reported a non-cash charge of $num-one million for final settlement and termination of legacy quaker's u.s. defined benefit pension plan, a process we previously disclosed.
despite the challenges we faced in qtr-one, the company generated good cash flow and adjusted ebitda, which was up num-one% on a pro forma basis and non-gaap earnings per share of $num-two was well above consensus of $num-three.
so, while our actual sales are up significantly to $num-one million in qtr-one, this is due to the inclusion of houghton and norman hay.
sequentially, non-gaap earnings per share is up from $num-one in qtr-four of year-four, which included houghton and norman hay and the additional shares.
in the table on slide-num, you can see a reported operating loss of $num-one million in the gaap section but in non-gaap operating income of $num-two million in the middle section.
overall, we estimate that covid impacted our sales by about num-one% in the first quarter.
for example, our april revenues were down in the order of num-one%.
our first quarter pro forma adjusted ebitda grew num-one% versus last year due to our integration savings, the impact of the norman hay acquisition last quarter, and the additional cost control measures we put in place to combat the global effect of covid on our volumes.
so please see slides num-one and num-two and also the chart on slide-num, while i review some highlights.
for year-five, our new estimate is $num-one million of cost synergies achieved versus our previous estimate of $num-two million.
for the full year, we expect our adjusted ebitda to be more than $num-one million.
concerning gross margins, you may recall from our comments in the past that the combined gross margins of quaker houghton were expected to be about num-one% lower than stand-alone quaker.
concurrent with this termination, the company paid approximately $num-one million, subject to final adjustment.
adjusting for all one-time charges and benefits, we estimate our etr would have been num-one% this qtr-one and num-two% in qtr-one last year.