this, along with share repurchase activity led to earnings-per-share growth of num-one% or $num-two to $num-three, as shown on slide six.
margins expanded a robust num-one basis points to num-two%, resulting in earnings per share of $num-three, up num-four% and ahead of internal targets.
organic revenue is up approximately num-one% with mid-single-digit growth in our core government businesses, partially offset by covid-related impacts of about three points from our commercial businesses, consistent with our expectations.
on portfolio shaping, we now expect about $num-one of dilution from announced divestitures net of buybacks from proceeds.
on margins, this strong start will likely push us toward the upper end of our range of num-one% to num-two%.
embedded in our guidance is $num-one billion of share repurchases from cash generation, which will be further augmented by over $num-two billion in net divestiture proceeds.
and to reiterate, inclusive of divestitures, we remain on track to deliver on our $num-one billion free cash flow commitment in year-seven, along with double-digit cash growth on a per share basis, excluding potential tax policy impacts.
cost synergies of $num-one million, primarily attributable to supply chain and facilities consolidation, put us well on track to deliver up to $num-two million of cumulative net benefits in year-six, a year ahead of schedule.
organic revenue was up about num-one% as growth in ims, sas and cs was partially offset by the expected decline in as due to the pandemic.
margins expanded num-one basis points to num-two%, with expansion in all four segments, primarily from operational excellence, integration benefits and cost management.
and while we're holding off on updating our $num-one billion share repurchase target for the year based on our announced and potential divestitures, we still see considerable upside to the plan.
in terms of the top line, our qtr-one results, coupled with the biden administration's announcement that the defense budget will continue to grow in fy year-seven, about num-one points versus fy year-six, reinforces our optimism for growth.
operating income was down num-one%, primarily from the sale of our airport security and automation businesses.
this puts us in a position to raise the bottom end of our full year earnings per share guidance by $num-one inclusive of announced divestiture impacts.
of this growth, synergies and operations contributed $num-one, along with a lower share count, pension and interest totaling $num-two, which more than offset divested earnings and headwinds from pandemic-impacted end markets.
this quarter, we saw the healthiest results since the merger at nearly num-one%, which puts us in a strong position to meet the upper end of our full year guidance.