we now forecast consolidated adjusted ebitda of $num-one to $num-two billion, and distributable cash flow of $num-three to $num-four billion for the full year year-six.
for the first quarter, we generated approximately $num-one billion of consolidated adjusted ebitda, approximately $num-two million of distributable cash flow and almost $num-three million in net income on revenue of approximately $num-four billion.
april ttf settled higher than jkm at $num-one an mmbtu that was num-two% higher on the month and up almost num-three% year-on-year.
early reports of total gas demand in china show an increase of approximately num-one% year-on-year in qtr-one.
during the first quarter, we exported a quarterly record of num-one cargoes of lng from our two facilities, with production incentivized by strong global lng margins during the quarter, and we had the benefit of corpus christi train three commissioning volumes.
significant drawdowns from storage through winter and into april has left european storage approximately num-one bcm or around num-two% lower than the prior year by the end of april and approximately num-three bcm or approximately num-four bcf below the five year average.
extreme cold weather in asia and then europe during the first quarter, combined with the supply constraints and a tight shipping market, caused unprecedented price spikes in jkm in the early part of the quarter to all-time highs of over $num-one in january.
for the first quarter, we generated net income of $num-one million, consolidated adjusted ebitda of approximately $num-two billion and distributable cash flow of approximately $num-three million.
the impact of shifts in these curves on the fair value of our commodity and fx derivatives, during first quarter year-six was a net loss of approximately $num-one million, which was substantially all noncash.
however, price levels are still well above where they were a year ago with march jkm settling at $num-one and june trading above $num-two currently.
the in the first quarter, global lng supply showed positive year-on-year growth for the first time since the first quarter of year-five, but net growth was modest as a healthy num-one% growth in u.s. exports was largely offset by declines at several lng facilities around the globe, which were either shut down or underperforming, including facilities in norway, nigeria, australia, trindad, tobago and russia.
in the subsequent four year period, that average is expected to drop to approximately num-one million tons a year, a significant slowdown in supply growth, which will be amplified by output declines from older legacy projects.
data from wood mackenzie suggest that the region could lose more than num-one bcf a day of domestic output by num-two, and while current upstream developments are considered unlikely to offset more than just a small fraction of that decline.
as jack mentioned, today, we are again increasing our guidance ranges for full year year-six consolidated adjusted ebitda and distributable cash flow by $num-one million, bringing total increases to $num-two million above the original ranges we provided in november of last year.
we forecast that global lng trade will approximately double, expanding by approximately num-one million tons per annum to over num-two million tonnes per annum by num-three, which would support additional, approximately num-four million tons per annum of incremental global supply.
our revised guidance ranges are $num-one to $num-two billion in consolidated adjusted ebitda and $num-three to $num-four billion in distributable cash flow.