in the fourth quarter, we generated adjusted company funds from operations of $num-one per diluted common share to end the year at $num-two per diluted common share, the high end of our guidance range.
adjusted company ffo for the fourth quarter was approximately $num-one million or $num-two per diluted common share.
we achieved the high-end range of our year-five adjusted company ffo guidance at $num-one per diluted common share.
following a robust quarter of $num-one million of industrial purchases and $num-two million of sales, our industrial exposure increased to num-three% of our gross real estate assets excluding held for sale assets.
we generated revenues of approximately $num-one million in the fourth quarter, which represented a slight increase compared to the same-time period in year-four.
we recently announced a dividend increase of num-one%, supported by our positive results throughout the year, which equates to an annualized dividend of $num-two per common share.
turning to leasing, we leased over num-one million feet during year-five and at year-end, our portfolio was num-two% leased, representing a slight decline compared to the previous quarter, primarily as a result of a year-end lease expiration in our statesville in north carolina, industrial facility.
also in the fourth quarter at our etna west development site in columbus, we sold the ground position under the num-one million square foot e-commerce distribution center leased to kohl's department stores, which exercised its two-year purchase option for $num-two million.
our balance sheet remains in excellent shape, with leverage at num-one times net debt to adjusted ebitda at year-end.
our year-five adjusted company ffo payout ratio was num-one% and continues to provide us ample retained cash flow.
we are currently reviewing over $num-one million of existing deals in the market.
we had another active year on the investment front, acquiring num-one industrial properties totaling num-two million square feet or $num-three million at average gaap and cash cap rates of num-four% and num-five% respectively.
overall, in year-five, gross revenues increased $num-one million year-over-year.
we were very pleased with industrial cash base renewal rents in year-five, which increased num-one%.
will mentioned earlier, that we have secured a full-building lease at our num-one square foot rickenbacker project in columbus late in the fourth quarter with a subsidiary of pepsico for three years.
we expect to market for sale most of this portfolio in year-six, which we currently value at around $num-one million.