during the third quarter of year-five, we recognized a non-cash impairment of $num-one million that reflected our expectation for reduced profitability from our houston refinery.
in the third quarter, our company delivered $num-one per share of earnings, more than num-two times higher than the same quarter last year.
we are confident that we can complete our deleveraging and achieve our target of reducing debt by $num-one billion before the end of this year.
robust demand drove ebitda to about $num-one billion, slightly lower than the second quarter.
strong cash flows supported debt reduction of nearly $num-one million, bringing our year-to-date debt reduction to $num-two billion.
while our portfolio delivered $num-one billion of ebitda, this quarter's results reflect a sequential decline of num-two%.
results were impacted by approximately $num-one million due to site closure costs associated with the exit of our ethanol business.
our year-to-date total recordable incident rate for employees and contractors rose to num-one during the third quarter.
we closed the third quarter with cash and liquid investments of $num-one billion.
ebitda was approximately $num-one billion, a year-over-year quarterly improvement of $num-two billion.
third quarter propylene oxide and derivatives results decreased about $num-one million as margins declined slightly from the historical highs of the second quarter.
customer supply chain constraints continue to hinge results with third quarter ebitda of $num-one million, $num-two million lower than the second quarter.
rising feedstock and energy costs drove margin declines in most businesses resulted in third quarter ebitda of $num-one million, $num-two million lower than the prior quarter.
efficient cash conversion generated $num-one billion in cash from operating activities, a new quarterly record for our company.
higher feedstock cost and lower seasonal demand during summer holidays reduced margins and volumes in our eai markets resulting in a third quarter ebitda of $num-one million, $num-two million lower than the second quarter.
during the fourth quarter, we expect that robust cash generation and an anticipated tax refund will enable continued progress on our goal to reduce debt by up to $num-one billion during year-six, and further strengthen our investment-grade balance sheet.