gaap diluted earnings per share was $num-one for the fiscal year-seven first quarter versus $num-two in the prior quarter.
non-gaap diluted earnings per share was $num-one in the current year quarter versus $num-two in last year's first quarter.
we expect our effective tax rate for the full fiscal year-seven year to be between num-one% and num-two%.
written same-store sales for the la-z-boy furniture galleries network increased num-one% versus the prior year quarter, and has grown at a compounded annual growth rate of num-two% across the last two years since pre-pandemic, demonstrating the continued strength of demand for our la-z-boy branded products.
compared with the pre-pandemic fiscal year-five first quarter, sales increased num-one% for a compounded annual growth rate of about num-two%.
on a consolidated basis, fiscal year-seven first quarter sales increased num-one% to a record $num-two million, reflecting strong demand, capacity increases, and a comparison to the fiscal year-six first quarter when we restarted our plants at reduced capacity after a month-long shutdown and most retailers were closed for a portion of the quarter due to covid.
sales for joybird which was reported in corporate and other, increased num-one% to $num-two million, almost tripling from the prior year first quarter.
across the la-z-boy enterprise, we delivered all-time record high sales of $num-one million, making and selling more furniture in the quarter than we ever have in modern history, even with production running only num-two weeks in the quarter, due to our annual one week maintenance shutdown in july, versus num-three weeks in most quarters.
finally, as we make investments in the business to strengthen the company for the future, we expect capital expenditures to be in a range of $num-one million to $num-two million for fiscal year-seven.
additionally, the board approved a dividend of $num-one per share to shareholders of record as of september num-txtd, year-six.
consolidated gaap operating margin was num-one% and non-gaap operating margin was num-two% reflecting expected significant short-term pressure on wholesale margins as the realization of previously announced pricing actions trailed escalating input costs, and we continue to invest in capacity expansion.
earlier this week, demonstrating its confidence in the company's ability to grow profitably and continue to generate strong cash flow from operations, the board of directors approved an increase of num-one million shares to the company's existing share repurchase authorization, with a num-two million shares available for repurchase under the program as of the end of the fiscal year-seven first quarter.
turning to cash, we generated $num-one million in cash from operating activities in the quarter.
starting with our wholesale segment, delivered sales for the quarter grew num-one% to $num-two million compared with the prior year period, compared with the pre-pandemic fiscal year-five first quarter, sales were num-three% higher for a compounded annual growth rate of num-four%.
over the past two quarters, we have returned $num-one million to shareholders via share repurchase.
written same-store sales for our company-owned retail segment increased num-one% versus the prior year period, and at a compounded annual growth rate of num-two% over the last two years.