our revenue for the quarter of $num-one million was above our internal expectations as was our adjusted ebitda of $num-two million.
total births at the hospitals where we provided nicu services were up num-one% on a same-unit basis, and our nicu days were up num-two%.
turning to g&a, our overall spend in qtr-three was down about $num-one million sequentially.
it was $num-one million this quarter versus about $num-two million in a year ago period.
on the office-based side, maternal fetal medicine volume was up num-one%, while pediatric cardiology was down num-two%, with this decline likely reflecting some deferrals of appointments during the quarter due to the surge in delta cases.
compared to year-four on a same unit basis for the quarter, our hospital volumes were up num-one%, and office-based volumes were up num-two%.
during the quarter, we also reduced our revolving credit facility capacity from $num-one billion to $num-two million, all of which is currently available to us with no remaining covenant restrictions.
based on our results, we now expect that our year-six adjusted ebitda will exceed our prior internal expectation of being above $num-one million, and we now expect year-six adjusted ebitda of at least $num-two million.
as most of you know, we have $num-one billion in outstanding num-two% coupon senior notes due num-three, making our debt structure fairly inefficient given our cash position and current net leverage.
finally, our transformational and restructuring expense in qtr-three was $num-one million, which predominantly reflects the cost of terminating other third-party agreements as part of the txt-num transition.
we also fully expect adjusted ebitda next year to exceed $num-one million, absent any major external events.
based on num-one debt of $num-two million and our year-six adjusted ebitda expectation, net leverage stands at about num-three times.
at a high level, looking at our geography of existing services, we believe that there's an opportunity for us to open more than num-one pediatric clinics across our footprint within a few years.
within hospital-based services, our nicu days were up num-one%, pediatric intensive care was up num-two% and pediatric hospitalist volumes were up num-three%.
second, in our daily operations, we strive to provide the best num-one support possible to our practices, which combines our patient service access initiatives, improving technology support, improving revenue cycle management efficiency, recruiting the best talent and old-fashioned focused managerial actions.
this reinforces our prior view that the second half g&a will be lower than the $num-one million we incurred in the first half of the year.