as a result, our revenue for the quarter of $num-one million was above our internal expectations, as was our adjusted ebitda of $num-two million.
on a same-unit basis, total volume was up num-one% versus the second quarter of year-four with hospital-based services up by num-two basis points and office-based services up by num-three%.
pediatric cardiology volume is still down slightly by num-one%, but we anticipate that, that could increase as we move into the fall.
to put some statistics behind these two phenomena, i'll point out that compared to the second quarter of year-four on a same-unit basis, volumes in our pediatric intensive care units were up num-one% and pediatric hospitalist volumes were up num-two%.
we received $num-one million in cash proceeds and recorded a $num-two million gain on the sale.
but we did incur a surge of it-related spend in the second quarter to bring all of this over the finish line, which all sized, is roughly $num-one million to $num-two million over the year-over-year increase in our total g&a when compared to last year.
these factors together support our confidence that in year-seven we can achieve adjusted ebitda above the $num-one million that i just referenced.
based on our expectations of second half adjusted ebitda and cash flow, this tax receivable and normal uses of cash for capex and m&a, we would expect to end this year with leverage below num-one times.
on the office space side, pediatric surgery volumes were up num-one% and maternal-fetal medicine was up num-two%.
we ended up the quarter with $num-one million in cash, up from $num-two million at the end of the first quarter, and net debt of $num-three million, implying leverage of less than three times.
and on a go-forward basis, we'll realize approximately $num-one million to $num-two million in annual g&a savings from the building sale.
in addition, you'll see on our balance sheet that we also have a $num-one million income tax receivable primarily related to the tax elections made with respect to the sale of our anesthesiology medical group last year, and we anticipate receiving that cash sometime in late year-six or early year-seven.
with all of these actions moving toward in our rearview mirror, we expect our dollar g&a spend for the second half of this year to be below $num-one million we incurred during the first half.
this group of num-one physicians and three nurse practitioners are among the premium groups of neurologists in the country.
looking forward beyond year-six and count for the same risks, there are a number of factors that give me increased confidence that we'll see additional growth in adjusted ebitda in year-seven that will get us pass the $num-one million run rate we achieved pre-covid.
we generated a strong $num-one million in operating cash flow for the second quarter.