mdc holdings delivered another quarter of strong profitability in the first quarter of year-six generating net income of $num-one million or $num-two per diluted share.
for the second quarter, we are anticipating home deliveries to reach between num-one and num-two units.
we delivered another quarter of strong profitability generating net income of $num-one million or $num-two per diluted share.
in spite of these minor delays, we remain confident in reaching our full-year target range for closings of between num-one and num-two units.
the average selling price of homes delivered during the quarter increased num-one% to about $num-two.
we also expanded our home sales gross margins by num-one basis points and improved our sg&a leverage by num-two basis points.
we expect the average selling price for our year-six second quarter unit deliveries to approximate $num-one.
for the remainder of the year, we currently estimate an effective tax rate of num-one%, excluding any discrete items and not accounting for any potential changes in tax rates or policy.
our unit orders increased num-one% year-over-year, mainly due to the acceleration in orders per community, which averaged num-two per month in the quarter.
our strong balance sheet also gives us the ability to pay out an industry-leading quarterly dividend of $num-one per share, which is up num-two% from the first quarter of last year.
our tax rate decreased from num-one% to num-two% for the year-six first quarter.
additionally, our financial services pre-tax income in the first quarter of year-five was negatively impacted by $num-one million of unrealized losses on equity securities, whereas no such loss was incurred in the first quarter of year-six.
as a result of our recent land acquisition and lot approval activity, our total lot supply to end the quarter exceeded num-one lots, representing an num-two% increase from the prior-year.
our debt-to-capital ratio was num-one% and our net debt-to-capital ratio was num-two%.
we ended the quarter with num-one homes in backlog, a num-two% increase over the first quarter of year-five.
we acquired num-one lots during the quarter across num-two subdivisions, which is a num-three% increase from the prior year.