net income increased num-one% to $num-two million or $num-three per diluted share for the second quarter of year-five.
this momentum continued into june, with net orders eclipsing last year's june totals by num-one%.
for the quarter, net orders were up num-one%, given the uncertainties and sales obstacles we faced at the end of the first quarter.
we are anticipating home deliveries for the third quarter of year-five to be between num-one and num-two.
for the full year, we are estimating to deliver between num-one and num-two homes.
the increase in units delivered was slightly offset by a num-one% decrease in our average selling price to about $num-two.
as previously mentioned, our gross margin from home sales improved by num-one basis points year-over-year to num-two%.
gross margin from home sales for the year-five third quarter is expected to again approximate num-one%, excluding impairments and warranty adjustments, consistent with the year-five second quarter.
however, even with the drop in lot approvals, our lot supply to end the quarter was num-one% higher than at the same point in year-four.
given these favorable market conditions, we are now targeting num-one home deliveries for the year-five full year.
homes delivered increased num-one% year-over-year to num-two, driven by an increase in the number of homes we had in backlog to start the quarter.
for the third and fourth quarters, we currently estimate a num-one% tax rate, excluding any discrete items.
both our homebuilding and financial services businesses contributed to these year-over-year improvements as pre-tax income from our homebuilding operations increased $num-one million or num-two%, and our financial services pre-tax income increased $num-three million or num-four%.
our tax rate decreased from num-one% to num-two% for the year-five second quarter.
we demonstrated solid operating leverage for the quarter as our sg&a expense as a percentage of home sale revenues decreased num-one basis points year-over-year to num-two%.
this decrease was in line with our strategic focus on affordability as a percentage of our deliveries for more affordable product collections rose to num-one% for the second quarter of year-five versus num-two% for the same period a year ago.