we reported gaap earnings of $num-one per share in the fourth quarter.
net income to common shareholders was $num-one million or $num-two per share.
on the other hand, fourth-quarter earnings were reduced by expenses related to the acceleration of discount in connection with our payoff of the $num-one million, num-two% apollo/athene senior note in september and october.
after the initial significant increase in cecl reserves taken in qtr-one and uncertainty related to covid economic impacts were at the highest, we have reduced our cecl reserves by almost $num-one million in the past three quarters.
with two num-txt at approximately num-one basis points, this hardly qualifies as a steep yield curve by historical standards, but it has steepened by about num-two basis points since the end of the year.
the yield curve does continue to surreptitiously steepen as the num-txtear backed up num-one basis points in the fourth quarter and another almost num-two since year end.
also, we reduced our overall cecl allowance in our current value loans to $num-one million, primarily reflecting lower estimates of future unemployment used for credit loss modeling purposes, but also partially due to lower loan balances.
please turn to page num-one.
net income includes $num-one million or $num-two per common share of expenses recognized on the repayment of the senior secured term loan from apollo/athene.
this reversal and other net adjustments to our cecl reserves positively impacted net income for the quarter by approximately $num-one million.
economic book value also negatively impacted by num-one% by the warrants was nevertheless unchanged at $num-two during the fourth quarter as our loans held at carrying value appreciated further.
i would also note that since exiting forbearance in june, we have lowered our cost of funds across our entire portfolio by num-one basis points to num-two% [date], year-five, and this falls even further to num-three% with the senior note redemption.
net gains of $num-one million were recorded, including $num-two million of market value increases and $num-three million of interest payments, liquidation gains, and other cash income.
this transaction lowers the funding rate of the underlying asset by over num-one basis points and increases the percentage of sfr financing that is non mark to market to num-two%, up num-three% from num-four% at the end of the fourth quarter.
we announced on our third-quarter earnings call that our board had authorized a $num-one million stock repurchase program and we executed this during the open-window period in the fourth quarter by purchasing num-two million shares at an average price of $num-three, which was accretive to gaap and economic book value by $num-four and $num-five, respectively.
obviously, our gaap book value would have been up by approximately num-one% for the quarter had it not been for these warrants.