we do anticipate revenues for the second quarter of year-five to decrease up to a high num-one% range from the prior-year period level although cash from operations and adjusted ebitda are expected to remain positive.
on an after-tax basis, this was $num-one million or $num-two per diluted share exclusive of a $num-three per diluted share benefit from other special items or $num-four per diluted share on a net basis for all special items.
early in the second quarter of year-five, we initiated a cost reduction and efficiency program, which should reduce the run rate of overhead by approximately num-one% beginning in the second quarter, a reduction we believe is consistent with our outlook for the year.
gross profit for the quarter was $num-one million or num-two% with margins down from a year ago, mostly due to underutilization resulting from the decrease in revenues.
we believe the second quarter should represent the largest deviation with our revenues potentially down as much as the high num-one% range from a year ago.
first quarter revenues were somewhat better than expected, down a little less than num-one% from a year ago.
gross debt increased by $num-one million during the first quarter of year-five from $num-two million at the end of the year to $num-three million at [date], year-five.
as anticipated, our oil and gas revenues in our services segment saw the largest decline, which was somewhat offset by nearly $num-one million improvements in domestic aerospace and defense.
given the impact of covid to our business, we did perform an assessment of the carrying value of goodwill and other intangibles in the first quarter of year-five and the result was that we recorded non-cash impairment charges of $num-one million.
as a result, we recorded a non-cash charge of $num-one million for permits in the first quarter of year-five, comprised of $num-two million related to goodwill and $num-three million related to primarily intangible assets.
we did utilize a little over $num-one million for capital expenditures in the first quarter, in line with our goal to reduce total capex this year from our typical run rate, in line with revenue expectations.
our net debt, total debt less cash, and cash equivalents was $num-one million at [date], year-five, compared to $num-two million at [date], year-four.
with our expectation of positive operating cash flow, each quarter this year, limited capital expenditure needs and our amended credit agreement, we have sufficient liquidity to support our operations and this would be while simultaneously reducing outstanding debt by the end of the year, including $num-one million already paid down in the second quarter.
but we did nevertheless generate adjusted ebitda of $num-one million for the second quarter of year-five and our goal remains to maintain adjusted ebitda as well as positive operating cash flow in each quarter of this year.
we maintained the remaining maturity of our existing credit agreement through december year-eight, including a $num-one million term loan, but we reduced our revolving credit line to a maximum of $num-two million to save cost related to the unused commitment, while ensuring a sufficient level of liquidity to fund our business.
in the first quarter of year-five, we further enhanced that reputation with cash from operating activities of $num-one million.