at the bottom line, as shown on slide-num, fourth quarter year-five adjusted earnings per share was $num-one, as compared to $num-two for the year-ago period.
our guidance range for adjusted earnings per share in year-six is $num-one to $num-two compared to $num-three of adjusted earnings per share in year-five.
our fourth quarter adjusted earnings per share was $num-one compared to $num-two in the prior year, driven primarily by lower adjusted operating income for the partial offset from lower interest expense.
turning to slide-num, starting with the fourth quarter results, which were in line with the guidance we provided for sales, adjusted operating profit, and adjusted earnings per share on our last earnings call on our top line versus the year ago period, we grew total sales num-one%, including a num-two% favorable impact from currency.
for the year, our num-one% constant currency increase in adjusted operating income combined with a lower interest expense drove a num-two% increase in adjusted earnings per share to $num-three for fiscal year-five, including the impact of unfavorable currency exchange rates versus last year.
this outlook versus our year-five adjusted effective tax rate is expected to be a headwind for our year-six adjusted earnings-per-share growth of approximately num-one%.
we're now projecting the total cost of our erp investment to range between $num-one million and $num-two million from year-four through the anticipated completion of our global rollout in fiscal year-eight, with an estimated split of num-three% capital spending and num-three% of operating expenses.
we also expect that there will be an estimated num-one percentage point favorable impact of currency rates on sales, adjusted operating income and adjusted earnings per share.
adjusted operating income declined num-one%, as growth from higher sales and cci-led cost savings were more than offset by higher planned brand marketing investments, covid-related costs, and higher employee benefit expenses.
at the top line, we expect to grow the constant currency sales num-one% to num-two% including the incremental impact of the cholula and fona acquisition, which is projected to be in the range of num-three% to num-four%.
turning to our fourth quarter segment business performance, starting on slide-num in our consumer segment, we grew fourth quarter sales by num-one%, or constant currency num-two% driven by consumers cooking and eating more at home.
year-five was the ninth consecutive year with record cash flow from operations ending the year at over $num-one billion, a num-two% increase from last year.
in constant currency, we grew total sales num-one%, with both segments contributing to the increase.
as a reminder, we completed a num-txtor-num-one stock split at the end of our fiscal year-five.
at year-end, our board of directors announced a num-one% increase in the quarterly dividend marking our num-txth consecutive year of dividend increases.
now starting with our year-five financial results as seen on slide-num, we grow num-one% constant currency sales growth with num-two% growth in our consumer segment led by consumers cooking and eating more at home.