we're raising the lower end of our full year year-six guidance and now expect to deliver adjusted diluted earnings per share in a range of $num-one to $num-two.
altria grew its third quarter adjusted diluted earnings per share, num-one% despite a backdrop of challenging comparisons and unfavorable year-over-year trade inventory movement.
we have approximately $num-one billion remaining under the newly expanded $num-two billion share repurchase program, which we expect to complete by [date], year-seven.
we also continue to reward shareholders with a strong and growing dividend and announced today the expansion of our share repurchase program to $num-one billion.
for the first nine months of the year, adjusted earnings per share grew num-one%, primarily driven by the strong financial performance of our tobacco businesses and higher abi adjusted earnings.
third quarter adjusted operating company's income decreased num-one%, reflecting the impact of trade inventory swings, but grew num-two% to $num-three billion for the first nine months, while marlboro remained strong.
michelle wine estates and expanding our share repurchase program from $num-one billion to $num-two billion and repurchasing num-three million shares totaling $num-four million.
this range represents a growth rate of num-one% to num-two% from a $num-three base in year-five.
retail share of oral tobacco increased a full share point sequentially, reaching num-one share points for the third quarter and nearly tripling since the end of last year.
the itc's importation ban will make the product unavailable for all consumers have switched to iqos, reduce the options for over num-one million smokers looking for alternatives to cigarettes and ultimately is detrimental to public health.
we believe reported volumes reflect an absolute wholesale inventory swing of num-one billion sticks as wholesalers build inventory in the third quarter of last year, but depleted inventories this quarter.
in e-vapor, we estimate that the total category volume increased num-one% versus the year ago period and increased num-two% sequentially as a result of continued elevated levels of competitive activity.
finally, all references in today's remarks to tobacco consumers or consumers within a specific tobacco category or segment refer to existing adult tobacco consumers num-one years of age or older.
as a result, we have written our investment in abi down to its [date] market value of $num-one billion.
and in discount, total segment retail share in the third quarter continued to fluctuate, increasing num-one percentage points sequentially to num-two%.
in the last four weeks of the third quarter, marlboro heatsticks achieved a cigarette category retail share of num-one% in northern virginia stores with distributions.