last night, we reported adjusted earnings per diluted share for the second quarter of $num-one, with adjusted net income of $num-two million and premium revenue of $num-three billion.
we are raising our full year year-six earnings guidance and now expect to end the year with adjusted earnings of no less than $num-one per share, an increase from our prior guidance of no less than $num-two per share.
the increased net effect of covid, which is now expected to create a $num-one per share decrease that should dissipate as the pandemic subsides.
we raised full year year-six adjusted earnings per share guidance to be no less than $num-one per share, which reflects the following: our underlying outperformance, an increase in our revenue guidance and the associated margin, the net effect of covid expectations, which has increased by $num-two per share and is now expected to be approximately $num-three per share for the full year, and continued caution in forecasting utilization trends in the remaining six months of the year due to the covid pandemic.
the num-one% medical care ratio demonstrates solid performance while managing through pandemic-related medical cost challenges that increased the ratio by num-two basis points.
in the second quarter, we produced premium revenue of $num-one billion, a num-two% increase over the first quarter of year-six, reflecting increased membership across our portfolio.
the net effect of covid decreased net income per diluted share by approximately $num-one.
this allowed us to produce, as projected, num-one% of our full year earnings guidance in the first half of the year.
we expect to end year-six with approximately num-one marketplace members.
we produced an adjusted after-tax margin of num-one%, meeting our second quarter expectations.
medicare risk score disruption that created approximately $num-one a share overhang; and as we obtain our target margins on magellan complete care and kentucky, and once affinity and cigna acquisitions are closed and synergized, we expect to achieve additional adjusted earnings per share of at least $num-two.
recall, that for each month the public health emergency has extended, beyond the month of september, it increases our full year revenue outlook by $num-one million.
specifically, the increase to our year-six earnings guidance reflects our underlying outperformance, the increase in our revenue guidance and the associated margin, offset by a $num-one increase in the net cost of covid, which we now expect to be $num-two per share for the full year.
we ended the quarter with approximately num-one million members, an increase of num-two members over the first quarter of year-six.
for year-six, we now project premium revenue to be more than $num-one billion, a num-two% increase over the full year year-five and a $num-three billion increase from our previous guidance.
our marketplace results have been significantly impacted by direct cost of covid-related care as we posted a medical care ratio of num-one% in the quarter.