flat quarter on quarter, total oil production of num-one barrels per day was quite an accomplishment in light of the operational challenges we experienced and the impact to production you've seen reported by peer companies.
for $num-one billion of capital spending, we now expect to generate $num-two billion of free cash flow at $num-three per barrel wti, up from the prior guidance of around $num-four billion.
as a result, we have dramatically enhanced the resilience of our company, driving our free cash flow breakevens consistently below $num-one per barrel wti and building on a multiyear trend of sustainable free cash flow and getting that cash back in the hands of our investors.
financial outcomes that can compete with any sector in the s&p num-one and do so across a much broader and lower range of commodity prices.
we have significant tax attributes in the form of net operating losses, approximately $num-one billion on a gross basis, in addition to foreign tax credits of over $num-two million.
during first quarter, we generated over $num-one million of free cash flow.
in fact, even with the recent dividend increase, our post-dividend free cash flow breakeven currently sits around $num-one per barrel of wti.
when considering our updated debt-reduction target on recent base dividend increase, we're actually on track to return well over num-one% of our cash flow back to investors this year.
the proof point for this sustainability is our five-year benchmark maintenance scenario that can deliver around $num-one billion of free cash flow from year-six to year-ten and a flat $num-two per barrel wti price environment or closer to $num-three billion of free cash flow at the current forward curve, along with a corporate free cash flow breakeven of less than $num-four per barrel throughout the period.
first, we accelerated our year-six gross debt-reduction objective of $num-one million, fully retiring our next significant maturity and we're now targeting at least another $num-one million of gross debt reduction, bringing our total year-six debt-reduction target to $num-two billion.
in summary, we are well-positioned this year to return over num-one% of our cash flow to investors through gross debt reduction and our base dividend, our top near-term priorities.
and in parallel, our aim is to significantly reduce our gross debt moving toward a $num-one billion gross debt level.
more specifically, our goal has been to reduce our net debt-to-ebitda to below num-one times, assuming more of a mid-cycle $num-two to $num-three per barrel wti environment.
my key message today is that we're on track to achieve all of our year-six operational objectives that we set at the beginning of the year, including our $num-one billion capital program, and that we are on track to exceed the free cash flow objectives.
as we make significant progress toward our $num-one billion gross debt objective, we will likely take the balance of year-six to accomplish.
with the increase in wells to sales and shifting capital from qtr-one to qtr-two, we expect qtr-two capex to rise to the $num-one million range, likely representing the peak capex quarter for the year.