quarterly revenue of $num-one million was down num-two% from a year ago or num-three% in constant currency.
quarterly revenue was down num-one% from a year ago.
orders across these areas were up num-one% in march and were up double digits in april versus a year ago.
in constant currency, revenue in the americas was down about num-one%, while international was down num-two%.
gross profit declined num-one basis points from a year ago.
first, our fgfd business declined num-one% compared to our very strong qtr-one of last year, while much of this business is project-based and will respond slower to economic recovery.
we delivered $num-one million to $num-two million of savings from restructuring programs and discretionary cost savings associated with reduced travel, controlled hiring, professional services and other costs.
looking at our segment performance, international margins were down num-one basis points to about num-two% of sales.
our expense of $num-one million was down num-two% or about $num-three million from a year ago, and this includes $num-four million of costs associated with the recent acquisition of bristol.
our quarterly adjusted operating margin was down num-one basis points on the gross profit headwinds and overall lower revenue volume.
they ordered thousands of altair num-one timesr portable gas detectors with safety io subscriptions.
over the next few years, this will result in a total order value of over $num-one million.
i say that because our sg&a in the second quarter of year-five was $num-one million, and that number reflects the initial cost reduction activities that occurred at the onset of the pandemic.
we generated cash flow conversion in excess of num-one% of net income.
and last, our bristol turnout gear business was about num-one basis points dilutive to overall gross profit.
we generated strong cash flow despite the p&l challenges, and i'm encouraged by the strong performance across working capital, which declined about num-one basis points as a percentage of sales from year-end without the impact of bristol.