gaap earnings per share were $num-one.
adjusted for the loss recovery, as well as restructuring and other charges, adjusted earnings per share were $num-one.
excluding the num-one million loss recovery and associated legal fees, as well as restructuring charges during the quarter of num-two million, our adjusted operating margin was num-three%, down num-four basis points from the prior year.
i would also note that we repurchased num-one million of stock during the quarter or about num-two shares at an average price of num-three per share.
sales of safety and janitorial products, as expected, given the significant surge during the pandemic last year, declined just over num-one% for the quarter.
revenues were up num-one% on an average daily sales basis as we're seeing continued sequential improvement in our sales levels.
furthermore, and as erik mentioned earlier, we expect to achieve num-one% or higher incremental margins in both fiscal year-seven and fiscal year-eight.
our third-quarter sales were num-one million, up num-two% versus the same quarter last year.
our gross margin for fiscal qtr-three was num-one%, up num-two basis points sequentially after adjusting our inventory writedown from last quarter and down just num-three basis points from last year.
operating expenses in the third quarter were num-one million or num-two% of sales versus num-three million or num-four% of sales in the prior year.
and we shared with you two goals that underpin our efforts: first, to accelerate market share capture with a target growth rate of at least num-one basis points above ip by the end of our fiscal year-eight; second, to return roic into the high teens powered not only by leveraging growth, but also by structural cost takeout of num-two to $num-three million also by the end of fiscal year-eight.
so on an average daily sales basis, net sales increased num-one%.
most notably, non-safety and non-janitorial product lines improved through the quarter from mid-single-digit declines in our second quarter to num-one% growth in our third quarter.
our free cash flow was num-one million in the third quarter, as compared to num-two million in the prior year.
given the success of the program through the first three quarters, we now expect to achieve savings for fiscal year-six of roughly num-one million.
our non-safety and non-janitorial growth is estimated at roughly num-one%, while safety and janitorial are estimated to be down roughly num-two% against last year's continued ppe surge.