net income attributable to vail resorts was $num-one million or $num-two per diluted share for fiscal-year year-six, compared to net income of $num-three million or $num-four per diluted share in the prior fiscal year.
our guidance for net income attributable to vail resorts is estimated to be between $num-one million and $num-two million for fiscal year-seven.
fiscal year-seven guidance includes an expectation that the first quarter of fiscal year-seven will generate a net loss attributable to vail resorts between $num-one million and $num-two million and resort reported ebitda between negative $num-three million and negative $num-four million.
and we estimate resort reported ebitda for fiscal year-seven will be between $num-one million and $num-two million.
resort reported ebitda was $num-one million for fiscal-year year-six, an increase of $num-two million compared to fiscal-year year-five.
excluding peak resorts, total skier visitation at our u.s. destination mountain resorts and regional ski areas for fiscal year-six was down only num-one% compared to fiscal year-four.
fourth-quarter results were also negatively impacted relative to our [date], year-six, guidance by a one-time $num-one million charge for a contingent obligation with respect to certain litigation matters.
fiscal year-six includes the impact from the deferral of $num-one million of pass product revenue and related deferred costs from fiscal year-five to fiscal year-six as a result of the credits offered to year-five-year-six north american pass product holders, a one-time $num-two million charge for a contingent obligation with respect to certain litigation matters and approximately $num-three million of favorability from currency translation from whistler blackcomb, which the company calculated on a constant-currency basis by applying current period foreign exchange rates to prior period results.
whistler blackcomb's total skier visitation for fiscal year-six declined num-one% compared to fiscal year-four.
at whistler blackcomb, we estimate the upcoming winter season will generate approximately $num-one million lower resort reported ebitda relative to the comparable period in fiscal year-four, primarily driven by the anticipated reduction in international visitation.
pass product sales through [date], year-six, to the upcoming year-six-year-seven north american ski season increased approximately num-one% in units and approximately num-two% in sales dollars as compared to the period in the prior year through [date], year-five, without deducting for the value of any redeemed credits provided to certain north american pass holders in the prior period.
we estimate the negative impacts of covid in australia and the associated limitations and restrictions, including the current lockdowns, will have a negative resort reported ebitda impact of approximately $num-one million in the first quarter of fiscal year-seven as compared to the first quarter of fiscal year-five.
using the midpoint of the guidance range, we estimate resort ebitda margin for fiscal year-seven to be approximately num-one%, which is negatively impacted as a result of covid impacts associated with australia in the first quarter of fiscal year-seven and the anticipated slower recovery in international visitation and group and conference business.
we are very pleased with the performance of our pass product sales efforts to date, which exceeded our original expectations for the impact of the num-one% price reduction, particularly in the growth of new pass holders and in trade-up, as we are seeing from pass holders, into higher-priced products.
however, subsequent covid-related stay-at-home orders and temporary resort closures negatively impacted financial results for the fourth quarter by approximately $num-one million relative to our guidance expectations issued on [date], year-six.
pass product sales are adjusted to eliminate the impact of foreign currency by applying an exchange rate of num-one between the canadian dollar and u.s. dollar in all periods for whistler blackcomb pass sales.