switching to our outlook for the rest of the year, we've revised our guidance range higher, now projecting earnings to be between $num-one and $num-two per share, a $num-three increase at the midpoint.
based on our strong first quarter well results and solid execution by our operations team, we are revising our production guidance to range -- to a range of num-one bcfe to num-two bcfe, a num-three bcfe increase at the midpoint.
national fuel's first quarter gaap earnings were $num-one per share when you back out items impacting comparability, including a ceiling test charge and the impact of a gain related to the sale of our timber properties, operating results were $num-two per share.
john and dave hit the high points in our upstream and pipeline businesses, so let me touch briefly on earnings at the utility, which were down $num-one million versus last year's first quarter.
national fuel's first quarter was a great start to our fiscal year, with operating results up num-one% year-over-year.
we are maintaining our fiscal year-six capex guidance, which remains in the $num-one million to $num-two million range.
operationally, we had a really strong quarter, particularly at seneca and nfg midstream, where in spite of num-one bcf of pricing-related curtailments, production and the associated gathering throughput was up num-two% over last year.
we produced a company record, num-one bcfe, despite approximately num-two bcf of price-related curtailments in october and early november.
looking out beyond the current year, the fiscal year-seven strip is around $num-one an mcf, a price where we realized strong returns from our appalachia program.
these are expected to be somewhat offset by revisions to our commodity price assumptions for the remaining nine months of the year, with our nymex natural gas guidance decreasing to $num-one per mmbtu and wti guidance increasing to $num-two per barrel.
although pricing in fiscal year-six has not been as strong as we initially projected during this winter, the supply and demand fundamentals, whether notwithstanding, remain constructive over the next num-one to num-two months.
as always, we have maintained our disciplined approach to hedging and are already well positioned in fiscal year-seven, with over num-one bcf of fixed price firm sales, nymex swaps and costless collars in place.
switching gears, our ferc-regulated pipeline businesses had a great quarter, with earnings up nearly num-one%.
as you can see from our updated slide deck at a $num-one nymex price, we expect our upstream and gathering businesses will generate approximately $num-two million to $num-three million in free cash flow in year-six.
additionally, we achieved between $num-one to $num-two per well in reduced water cost on our recent tioga num-three pad completions through the use of acquired water withdrawal points and storage facilities.
with respect to consolidated capital spending, all of our segment ranges remain the same, and we are still projecting between $num-one million and $num-two million for the fiscal year.