for the quarter ending [date], year-five, we achieved $num-one per share in earnings.
for the nine months ending september, we achieved $num-one per share in earnings compared to $num-two per share for the same period in year-four, which is reflective of the gains we recorded during year-five for real estate dispositions.
that compares to $num-one per share for the same period in year-four.
for our three ffo performance metrics per diluted common share for the third quarter compared to the prior year quarter, nareit ffo and normalized ffo were both flat at $num-one and adjusted ffo increased num-two% to $num-three per share.
in the third quarter and for the year to date, we reported affo per share growth of num-one% and num-two% respectively.
we are encouraged by the depth of the current pipeline, as we expect we will have plenty of capital to recycle in the next num-one months from sources, including the previously mentioned bickford portfolio sale, loan repayments, purchase options and other select dispositions.
bickford has applied for grants under phase num-one and num-two of the provider relief fund, which we expect that they will receive before year-end, which will also improve their financial position.
i'm pleased to report to you that we continue to pay our dividend with an affo payout ratio in the low-num-one% range without significant further cash flow burdens from routine capital expenditures.
for the quarter ending [date], cash noi increased num-one% to $num-two million compared to $num-three million in the prior year period.
phase num-one applications were due by [date].
active resident cases peaked in late july at num-one cases across our portfolio and then trended down to num-two cases in early october.
we are also continuing to work with prospective lenders and bickford on the previously disclosed sale of nine properties, which we estimate will improve bickford's annual cash flow by approximately $num-one million.
we collected nearly num-one% of rents in the quarter and nearly num-two% in october.
at the beginning of the third quarter, we added liquidity to the balance sheet through a new $num-one million one-year -- with one-year option to extend term loan.
bickford, our largest assisted living operator representing num-one% of annualized cash revenue, experienced an num-two basis point sequential decline in third quarter average occupancy, which compared to num-three basis point decline in the prior quarter comparison.
however, reflecting qtr-three rent deferrals, cash noi was down num-one% sequentially from the second quarter.