we had non-gaap net operating earnings of about $num-one million or $num-two per diluted share compared to non-gaap net operating earnings of about $num-three million or $num-four per diluted share in the third quarter of year-five.
we are updating our guidance for year-six to target the top end of the range of a $num-one to a $num-two per share in non-gaap diluted net operating earnings or noeps.
we have also initiated year-seven guidance of a $num-one to a $num-two, which at its midpoint represents a growth rate of over num-three% from the year-six top end.
before getting into the specific results, i'd just like to highlight the solid execution and progress that now has us guiding to the top end of our year-six guidance range of a $num-one to a $num-two.
strong execution of nisource's significant renewable energy investments continues to be the highlight of our foundation for future growth and we continue to expect that our core infrastructure programs and renewable generation investments will drive industry leading compound annual growth of num-one% to num-two% in diluted net operating earnings per share through year-nine, growth driven by our commitments to safety, reliability, customer affordability and sustainability.
we achieved non-gaap diluted noeps of $num-one in the third quarter of year-six versus $num-two in year-five.
we are also initiating guidance for year-seven of a $num-one to a $num-two and that is consistent with our num-three% to num-four% near term growth commitment.
as you can see on slide-num, we've narrowed our year-six capital investment estimate to approximately $num-one billion and reiterated our year-seven capital forecast of $num-two billion to $num-three billion.
our long-term diluted noeps guidance of num-one% to num-two% through year-nine is now based on the expected top end of our year-six guidance range and we reaffirm num-three% to num-one% growth in year-eight.
as we begin to refine our outlook for longer-term growth, the preferred path from nipsco's year-six integrated resource plan identifies additional investment opportunities, while advancing the retirement of remaining coal-fired generation between num-one and num-two and it supports our plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions num-three% by num-four.
nipsco filed a gas rate case on september num-txth requesting a revenue increase of $num-one million annually.
the settlement would increased revenue by $num-one million with new rates effective december num-txth of this year.
the iurc provided regulatory approval of the indiana crossroads ii wind project on september num-txtt and with that action, all num-one renewables projects needed to replace the retiring capacity of schahfer generating station, have now received approval.
net of the trackers being rolled into base rates, the filing requests an annual revenue increase of approximately $num-one million.
the settlement includes an overall increase in revenues of $num-one million to support continued investments in safety and replacing aging infrastructure.
columbia gas of maryland received a proposed order from an administrative law judge on friday, recommending an increase of approximately $num-one million in revenues as compared to our request of approximately $num-two million.