our book value per share was $num-one for qtr-two, a num-two% increase from qtr-one, and we generated core earnings per share, excluding paa, of $num-three, a num-four% increase from the prior quarter.
as i mentioned, we outearned the dividend by $num-one this quarter, and absent another market dislocation or other unforeseen developments, we expect qtr-three core earnings to also exceed the dividend.
book value increased on gaap net income of num-one million or $num-two per share, which includes $num-three related to cecl and specific reserves, and higher other comprehensive income of num-four million or $num-five per share on improved valuations on agency mbs, resulting from lower market rates.
we delivered an economic return of nearly num-one% and achieved core earnings well in excess of our rightsized dividend.
with respect to our cre portfolio, specifically, total assets at quarter end of num-one billion represented a slight decrease, while economic interest remained essentially flat.
consequently, we reduced leverage during the quarter from num-one to num-two times and made the prudent decision to set our quarterly dividend at $num-three.
the decline in portfolio size was driven by approximately num-one million in loan payoffs, as well as securities sales.
non-agency securities across legacy, crt, jumbo num-one and non-qm have seen substantial recovery.
on the financing side, our weighted average cost of borrowing decreased by roughly num-one basis points to num-two%, driven largely by a reduction in libor given fed cuts.
additionally, during the second quarter, we utilized our share buyback program and have now repurchased num-one million in common stock year to date.
the dividend represents a num-one% yield on our book value, which is in line with our historical average, while being competitive relative to our peers and various fixed income benchmarks.
on a more positive note, multifamily remains strong throughout the quarter as the latest data indicates over num-one% of renters made a full or partial rent payment as of june.
and in the office sector, although new leasing has slowed significantly, office reits have reported strong rent collections above num-one% throughout the back end of the second quarter.
we further reduced the libor footprint of our hedge portfolio with our swap book now num-one% in ois and we reinitiated our treasury future short position that was unwound in the first quarter.
our residential portfolio was roughly unchanged quarter over quarter at num-one billion as modest purchases and mark-to-market increases largely offset sales and portfolio runoff.
cross sectors within commercial, the operating fundamentals remain challenged in hospitality as the average national occupancy rate hovers around num-one%.