we generated core earnings per share, excluding paa, of $num-one, a decrease of num-two% or $num-three per share from the prior quarter.
delving deeper into the gaap results, we generated gaap net income of $num-one million or $num-two per common share for qtr-four, down from $num-three billion or $num-four per common share in the prior quarter.
to set the stage with some summary information, our book value per share was $num-one for qtr-four, a num-two% increase from qtr-three.
book value increased on gaap net income, partially offset by the aggregate common and preferred dividends of $num-one million or $num-two per share and other comprehensive loss of $num-three million or $num-four per share.
our allocation to credit marginally increased to num-one%, as we began the fourth quarter at the lower end of our range.
this backdrop, coupled with active portfolio management, drove our strong performance to close out the year as we delivered an economic return of num-one% for the quarter, ensuring a positive return for our shareholders for year-five which is particularly notable given the historic disruption we all faced in march.
we generated a full-year economic return of num-one% and a total shareholder return of num-two%.
in addition, average time to refinance loans has steadily increased from num-one days this past spring to almost num-two days as of late.
activity picked up in the fourth quarter as liquidity reentered the sector and we were able to grow our portfolio nearly num-one% to $num-two billion.
in fact, the loan-to-deposit ratio for the sector is the lowest we have seen in the past num-one years.
we've reduced leverage in each quarter since the end of year-four through last year and maintained leverage at num-one times quarter over quarter, the lowest we've had since the first quarter of year-two.
proactive capital management remains a priority and we renewed our common stock repurchase program authorization following $num-one million in repurchases in year-five.
as discussed on recent earnings calls, our targeted investment strategy continues to differentiate our portfolio relative to our peers, and our middle market lending group's disciplined credit focus has proven itself out through strong fundamentals with underlying borrower ltm ebitda, increasing by num-one% on average since initial close.
looking at year-five data, banks [inaudible] set net bought over $num-one trillion mbs in aggregate which was more than twice the available net agency supply last year.
our core earnings also represent num-one% of our dividend and we saw back-to-back quarters of num-two% plus of core roe.
while we were able to resume origination activity this past fall, volume did not offset the $num-one million in pay downs, as well as, an opportunistic sale in our healthcare portfolio.