as jay noted, today, we initiated year-six core ffo per share guidance of $num-one to $num-two per share.
and affo per share was $num-one per share for the fourth quarter, which is $num-two per share higher than the preceding third quarter's $num-three.
that's up $num-one from the preceding third quarter's $num-two.
highlights for national retail properties in year-five include: increasing the common stock dividend for the num-txtt consecutive year, a feat matched by only two other reits and by less than num-one% of all u.s. public companies; raising $num-two million of well-priced debt capital early in the year, which put us in a strong liquidity position as the pandemic began to spread and enabled us to end year-five with $num-three million of cash in the bank and nothing drawn on our $num-four million line of credit; reaching collaborative rent deferral agreements during the early stages of the pandemic with a number of our relationship tenants, which solidified our relationships and set us up for future acquisition business; collecting num-five% of our rents due for the fourth quarter and num-six% of our annual base rent for the year year-five; supporting our associates and our community with programs and activities to advance associate well-being, employee engagement and community involvement; and lastly, enhancing our executive leadership team with the appointment of steve horn, a num-txtear veteran with the company, as our chief operating officer.
so this classification required us to write off all outstanding receivable balances for these tenants, which in the fourth quarter was $num-one million of rent receivables and $num-two million of accrued rent balances totaling $num-three million or approximately $num-four per share for the fourth quarter.
and while we agreed to a num-one% rent reduction for num-two months ending december year-six, none of our num-three leases were rejected in bankruptcy.
as i've said before, perhaps the best word to describe national retail properties is consistent: consistent investment focus on single-tenant retail properties; consistency of people and culture; consistently raising the dividend for num-one consecutive years; consistent conservative balance sheet philosophy that maintains flexibility and dry powder; consistent long-term tenant relationships.
as jay noted, occupancy was num-one% at quarter end, up num-two basis points from the prior quarter.
notwithstanding the impact of the pandemic, our broadly diversified portfolio of num-one single-tenant retail properties ended the year with an occupancy rate of num-two%, which continues to exceed our long-term average of num-three%.
almost num-one of our associates have been with the company for at least five years, and approximately half have been with us for num-two years or more.
we have included on page num-one of today's supplemental, which is on our website, some disclosure on the amounts and timing of the anticipated repayment of deferred rent over the next couple of years.
g&a expense for the fourth quarter was num-one% of revenues and -- for the fourth quarter and then num-two% for the full year year-five, which is fairly flat with year-four's g&a levels.
as highlighted above, our rent collections continued to trend positive during the quarter, resulting in collections of num-one% of fourth quarter rents.
at the end of the fourth quarter, we had approximately $num-one million or about num-two% of our annual base rent being recognized on a cash basis as a result of our estimation that it was not probable these tenants were going to pay substantially all of their remaining lease payments.
we raised $num-one million of equity in the fourth quarter at just over $num-two per share.
kevin will provide more details on the $num-one million of equity capital we raised in year-five via our atm.