for the quarter, we reported a net loss from continuing operations of $num-one million or $num-two per share compared to net income of $num-three million or $num-four per share for the same period in year-four.
today, we reaffirm guidance for the continuing operations in the range of $num-one to $num-two per share and guide toward the lower end of the range due to the potential implications of covid.
for the first six months of year-five, we reported net income from continuing operations of $num-one million or $num-two per share compared to net income of $num-three million or $num-four per share for the same period in year-four.
we estimate the total impact of covid to be in about approximate to be approximately $num-one million or $num-two per share, most of which hit in the second quarter.
also note that earnings per share comparisons were impacted by the issuance of num-one million shares in june of year-four as we raised equity to fund investments in our gas utility.
excluding that disallowance, on an adjusted non-gaap basis, earnings per share from continuing operations was $num-one for year-four.
the filing includes a $num-one million increase in revenue requirement compared to a requested $num-two million amount.
second, last year's second quarter results benefited from the reversal of an earnings test reserved for environmental remediation expenses that we booked in the first quarter equal to $num-one per share.
last year's results included a regulatory disallowance of $num-one per share related to an oregon commission order.
covid impacts on margin are estimated to be $num-one million, including a $num-two decline in revenues from lower late charges and disconnection fees as we temporarily and voluntarily suspended these charges in march.
as market conditions have improved, we reduced that to $num-one million.
higher customer rates in washington, customer growth and revenues from the north mist expansion project contributed $num-one million, which was more than offset by a $num-two million increase in environmental remediation expense due to the reserve release in the prior year.
utility o&m increased $num-one million in the quarter as we incurred higher contractor service costs related to pipeline and meter safety as well as moving expenses as we transition to a new headquarters and operations center.
our effective tax rate for the quarter was num-one% as a result of the return of excess deferred income taxes to our oregon customers.
the $num-one per share decline is largely due to year-over-year growth in expenses and the effects of covid.
that, combined with the decline in natural gas prices, has led to natural gas bills that are about num-one% lower today than they were num-two years ago, which is very good news for our customers.