adjusted diluted earnings per share was $num-one in the quarter, $num-two higher than the prior year.
we reported adjusted operating profit of approximately $num-one million, higher than the same period in year-five by $num-two million and higher than year-four by $num-three million which is an important comparison point given the impact that the pandemic had on our year-five results.
total subscription revenues are expected to increase approximately num-one% to num-two% compared with the third quarter of year-five with digital-only subscription revenue expected to increase approximately num-three% to num-four%.
total subscription revenue grew num-one% in the quarter, the largest year-on-year subscription revenue gain in more than a decade.
the combined strength in these two revenue streams more than offset cost growth, and as a result, we recorded $num-one million in adjusted operating profit, a num-two% improvement compared to the same quarter in year-five.
overall advertising revenues are expected to increase approximately num-one% to num-two% compared with the third quarter of year-five and digital advertising revenues are expected to increase approximately num-three% to num-four%.
we added num-one net new subscriptions to our core digital news product and num-two net new subscriptions to our stand-alone digital products for a total of num-three net new digital-only subscriptions.
other revenues are expected to increase approximately num-one%.
both operating costs and adjusted operating costs are expected to increase approximately num-one% to num-two% compared with the third quarter of year-five as we continue investment into the drivers of digital subscription growth and comp against another quarter of low spending last year as a result of actions taken during the first year of the pandemic.
as meredith said, this is the highest rate of subscription revenue growth in well over a decade, with digital-only subscription revenue growing more than num-one% to $num-two million.
as of the end of the quarter, we had approximately num-one games subscriptions and approximately num-two cooking subscriptions.
total subscription revenues increased num-one% in the quarter.
our advertising performance was better than expected, with total revenue up num-one% year-on-year.
given the opportunity we see, an addressable market of at least num-one million people who are expected to pay for english language journalism and a unique moment in which daily habits are up for grabs, we are continuing to invest in the value of our individual products and the broader bundle.
total daily circulation declined num-one% in the quarter compared with prior year, while sunday circulation declined approximately num-two%, which represents a significant improvement in the recent trend following the steep declines experienced as a result of the widespread business closures and a decrease in commuting of travel as a result of the pandemic.
with sustained strength relative to year-four and prior years in overall audience and with more than num-one million registered users, we are also experimenting more aggressively and we believe more successfully on our customer journey and access model.