when combined with mav, we expect the over $num-one million in capital provided by oaktree can enable us to potentially increase our earnings per share by num-two% or more once the proceeds are fully invested.
we're excited to announce that we've executed definitive agreements with oaktree for $num-one million in incremental capital through holdco notes issued by ocwen financial corporation.
the average margins fell to about num-one basis points versus our expectation of num-two basis points for qtr-four.
annualized adjusted pre-tax profitability has improved over $num-one million over the second-quarter year-three baseline for ocwen and phh combined.
we estimate full deployment of the proceeds can generate roughly $num-one per share in incremental earnings on a fully diluted basis.
the oaktree notes have a face value of $num-one million with a $num-two million original issue discount for net proceeds of $num-three million.
adjusted pre-tax profitability was up roughly num-one% in the fourth quarter over the third quarter despite declining origination margins.
we reported a gaap net loss of $num-one million, $num-two million improvement over prior quarter and after the $num-three million of additional cfpb accrual i previously mentioned.
this translates to over a num-one% increase above our potential baseline earnings per share range which assumes an after-tax roe range of roughly num-two% to num-three% on about $num-four million of equity.
our strategic alliance with oaktree can provide almost $num-one billion of incremental capital to enable a level of growth, earnings per share accretion, and potential value creation that we could just not achieve on a stand-alone basis.
the remaining $num-one million in proceeds from the holdco notes will be used to support our on book growth objectives through msr purchases and funding a portion of the mav investment.
flow origination volume in the fourth quarter was up num-one% over the third quarter and up over num-two times as compared to year-four.
we continue to target achieving at least a num-one% recapture rate for our recapture platform and we believe our recapture performance is only limited by our operating capacity to address available opportunities.
in addition, oaktree will receive warrants for num-one% of the fully diluted shares of ocwen.
in addition, in the fourth quarter, we were awarded multiple subservicing contracts with projected volume of $num-one billion to $num-two billion that we expect will board in the first and second quarter.
in year-six, looking ahead, the market, we expect the total originations will be down roughly about num-one%, with much decline in the second half of the year.