our earnings per share was $num-one, beating analyst consensus by over two times.
by quarter end, it was num-one.
consensus industry forecast is for rising rates and about a num-one% average reduction in industry origination volumes.
we're growing in higher-margin channels, services, and products giving us strong momentum, and the rms platform acquisition gives us access to a potential $num-one billion reverse mortgage subservicing market, which is an exciting new growth opportunity for us.
we also closed our planned call rights transaction for the third quarter and have deployed more than num-one% of mam's investment commitment.
and for year-seven, we're targeting about num-one% growth in subservicing additions and harvesting embedded ebo and call rights income to diversify and grow our revenue.
net income in the quarter was $num-one million, including $num-two million in unfavorable notables, largely driven by msr fair value changes from higher actual prepayments than modeled, negative effects of basis risk, partially offset by higher market interest rates net of hedging.
year over year, consumer direct volume in both forward and reverse is up num-one%, both forward and reverse delivered record retail funding and lock volumes in october.
we expect ebo, call rights, and other revenue diversification in the range of $num-one million to $num-two million, and the segments continue to achieve productivity targets.
we believe we're on track to meet our num-one% refinance recapture rate objectives in the fourth quarter.
the num-txtear treasury rate was trading at num-one basis points.
our reverse market share is up from num-one% in third quarter year-five to num-two% in third quarter year-six, and this compares to about num-three% in the third quarter of year-four.
we closed $num-one billion in total servicing additions in the third quarter with very strong performance in subservicing additions.
we secured $num-one billion in new awards in the third quarter, and we have a $num-two billion opportunity with our top num-three prospects and a potential prospect pipeline of $num-four billion and growing.
our top num-one prospects represent roughly $num-two billion in opportunity, and our total prospect pipeline has grown to slightly over $num-three billion.
from a loan count perspective, the nrz loans are down to num-one% of the total as, compared to num-two% in third quarter of last year, and the nrz loans also comprise about two-thirds, num-three% of our total nonperforming loans as of the third quarter of year-six.