for the third and fourth quarters we are establishing ranges for ffo per share guidance as adjusted for comparability of $num-one to $num-two and $num-two to $num-three respectively.
second quarter ffo per share as adjusted for comparability of $num-one exceeded the high end of guidance by a $num-two.
second quarter ffo per share as adjusted for comparability of $num-one exceeded the high end of guidance by $num-two driven primarily by stronger same property results.
lastly, and for reasons already discussed, we are increasing our full year guidance from a previously elevated range of $num-one to $num-two to a new range of $num-three to $num-four.
our updated guidance range implies num-one% to num-two% growth over year-five results and num-three% at the midpoint.
additionally, noi from real estate operations in the quarter was up num-one% and affo increased num-two% from a year ago.
based on the num-one million square feet of opportunities in our development leasing pipeline, we are highly confident we will meet our year-six development leasing goal.
we expect to deliver nova c in num-one guardian way earlier than planned, which combined with project el are adding nearly $num-two to this year's ffo per share.
the $num-one midpoint of updated year-six guidance is $num-two above our original midpoint and num-three% higher than year-five results.
the $num-one midpoint in the third quarter reflects a full quarter's dilution from the two data center shells we joint ventured in june and executing additional r&m projects.
based on this activity we're highly confident we will achieve our num-one million square foot growth for the year.
regarding our large renewal at dc-num-one, we have not finalized the lease yet.
during the quarter, we placed num-one square feet of development projects in the service including project el, num-two square foot specialized facility we built for a defense contractor in san antonio.
lastly, we are in advanced negotiations with a defense contractor for a two-building campus at redstone gateway for num-one square feet.
these leases would bring our total development leasing for the year to num-one square feet.
including three properties under development, we wholly own num-one data center shells that we estimate represent more than $num-two million of equity value we can monetize to fund the equity component of future development.