our fourth quarter adjusted ffo is $num-one per share and funds available for distribution are $num-two per share.
we have maintained our quarterly dividend of $num-one per share.
our nareit ffo for the fourth quarter was $num-one million or $num-two per share on a diluted basis, as compared to $num-three million or $num-four per diluted share for the fourth quarter of year-five.
trailing num-txtonth operator ebitdarm and ebitdar coverage for our core portfolio, as of [date], year-six, decreased to num-one times and num-two times, respectively, versus num-three and num-four times, respectively, for the trailing num-txtonth period ended [date], year-six.
occupancy for our overall core portfolio continue to slowly trend up throughout year-six, reaching a high of num-one% in december, up from a low in january of year-six of num-two%.
the year-over-year decrease is primarily the result of $num-one million of straight line and lease inducement write-offs in the fourth quarter of year-six related to guardian and one other operator both placed on a cash basis in the fourth quarter of year-six.
revenue for the fourth quarter was approximately $num-one million before adjusting for certain nonrecurring items, compared to $num-two million for the fourth quarter of year-five.
january year-seven, mid-month occupancy actually fell off slightly to num-one%, mainly as a result of the robust omicron variant.
trailing num-txtonth operator ebitdarm and ebitdar coverage would have decreased slightly during the third quarter of year-six to num-one and num-two times, respectively, as compared to num-three and num-four times, respectively, for the second quarter when excluding the benefit of federal stimulus funds.
this portfolio on a pure-play basis, had its trailing num-txtonth ebitdar lease coverage fall num-one basis point to num-two times at the end of the third quarter as compared to the end of the second quarter.
during the third quarter of year-six, our operators cumulatively recorded approximately $num-one million in federal stimulus funds, as compared to approximately $num-two million recorded during the second quarter.
in qtr-four, we recorded $num-one million of revenue based on our continued ability to offset any unpaid rent against the balance of the sub debt obligations owed by omega.
this compares to the stand-alone second quarter of num-one times and num-two times with and without the $num-three million in federal stimulus funds, respectively.
the steps taken over the past num-one months also provide us with the tools we need to continue to evaluate and act upon any additional actions that may be needed to further enhance our liquidity or improve shareholder value.
on [date], year-six, gulf coast and operator representing approximately $num-one million or num-two% of annual revenue, filed for chapter num-three bankruptcy in wilmington, delaware.
to be consistent with prior quarters, only $num-one million of revenue was included within adjusted ffo and fad.