oneok's second-quarter year-six net income totaled $num-one million or $num-two per share.
in july, the board of directors declared a dividend of $num-one or $num-two per share on an annualized basis, unchanged from the previous quarter.
second-quarter adjusted ebitda totaled $num-one million, a num-two% increase year over year and a num-three% increase compared with the first-quarter year-six after backing out the benefit from winter storm uri.
our view of year-six continues to improve as we now expect year-six adjusted ebitda to be above the midpoint of our guidance range of $num-one billion to $num-two billion that we provided back in april.
we expect to recognize $num-one million of earnings in the second half of year-six as our current inventory is fractionated and sold, the majority of which will be recognized in the third quarter.
towards the end of june, volumes reached num-one billion cubic feet per day, and we have line of sight to even higher processed volumes later in the year given the recent increase in completion crews and rigs in the basin.
terry championed many companies' successes, the transition to higher fee-based business model with less commodity price exposure, significant improvements in companywide safety and environmental performance, the successful oneok partners merger transaction and the completion of more than $num-one billion in capital growth projects to name just a few of his many accomplishments.
we now expect the fee rate for year-six to average between $num-one and $num-two per mmbtu.
in the rocky mountain region, second quarter processed volumes averaged more than num-one billion cubic feet per day, an increase of num-two% compared with the first-quarter year-six and more than num-three% year over year.
in the natural gas pipelines segment, the segment reported a solid quarter of stable fee-based earnings, the decrease in earnings year over year was driven by a onetime contract settlement that provided a $num-one million benefit to earnings in the second quarter of year-five.
we ended the second quarter with no borrowings outstanding on our $num-one billion credit facility and nearly $num-two million in cash.
the company has grown in many ways since i was here last, and i'm looking forward to building on what terry, the board, the leadership team and oneok's num-one employees have achieved.
the mid-continent region average process volumes increased num-one% compared with the first-quarter year-six as volumes returned following freeze offs in the first quarter.
for num-one of my almost num-txtear career, i had the good fortune to work with the assets and the people through various companies that are now a part of oneok.
in our natural gas liquids segment, total ngl raw feed throughput volumes increased num-one% compared with the first-quarter year-six.
full recovery in the rockies region would provide an opportunity for $num-one million in annual adjusted ebitda at full rates.