we now anticipate adjusted earnings per share of approximately $num-one for fiscal year-six.
eps for the quarter was $num-one per share, flat to the prior year as a result of lower interest expense from debt pay down, offsetting the lower revenue and a&m timing.
qtr-three revenue of $num-one million declined num-two% on an organic basis versus the prior year, which excludes the effects of foreign currency.
for the full year fiscal year-six, we now anticipate revenues of approximately $num-one million.
by segment, north american revenues were down num-one%.
we continue to target num-one% to num-two% long-term organic sales growth, which translates into mid to high single-digit earnings growth driven by our stable and solid financial profile and disciplined capital allocation strategy.
we still expect a&m for the full year to be you just under num-one% as a percent of sales as we continue at a normalized rate of spend in the fourth quarter.
during the quarter, we repurchased approximately $num-one million in shares opportunistically leaving the remainder of our cash generation on the balance sheet in anticipation of a potential bond refinancing event in qtr-four to opportunistically capitalize on the attractive debt rate environment.
total company gross margin of num-one% in the first nine months was largely flat to last year's adjusted gross margin of num-two% and has been stable across quarters.
lastly, we realized strong num-one% earnings per share growth for the first nine months of fiscal year-six versus the prior year.
these attributes to translate into free cash flow as well and we continue to anticipate free cash flow of $num-one million or more, which is at or above the prior year's level.
for the full year, we anticipate g&a expenses to approximate num-one% of sales and remain below prior year in absolute dollars.
for the first nine months revenues were down num-one basis points.
in the quarter, we generated $num-one million in free cash flow, which, as expected, was lower than last year due to both timing of working capital and capex investments.
advertising and marketing came in at num-one% of revenue in qtr-three and num-two% for the first nine months.
at the end of qtr-three, we had approximately $num-one billion of net debt, which equated to a leverage ratio of num-two.num-txt.