yesterday, we reported third quarter net income of $num-one million or $num-two per share, excluding the special items, third quarter year-six net income was $num-three million or $num-four per share compared to third quarter year-five net income of $num-five million or $num-six per share.
considering these items, we expect fourth quarter earnings of $num-one per share.
third quarter net sales were $num-one billion in year-six and $num-two billion in year-five.
domestic containerboard and corrugated products prices and mix together were $num-one per share above the third quarter of year-five and up $num-two per share compared to the second quarter of year-six.
after completion of the acquisition, our containerboard integration is expected to increase by almost num-one tons.
our planned annual maintenance expense for the quarter is still expected to be about $num-one per share or about $num-two per share primarily due to the deridder mill outage.
we currently expect to end the year with total capital spending around $num-one million.
export containerboard prices were up $num-one per share compared to the third quarter of year-five and up $num-two per share compared to the second quarter of year-six.
excluding the special items, the $num-one per share increase in third quarter year-six earnings compared to the third quarter of year-five was driven primarily by higher prices in mix of $num-two and volume $num-three in our packaging segment.
third quarter net income included special items expenses of $num-one per share primarily for certain costs at the jackson alabama mill for paper to containerboard conversion related activities while last year's third quarter net income included special items expenses of $num-two per share that were related primarily to the impact of hurricane laura on the deridder, louisiana mill.
total company ebitda for the third quarter excluding the special items was $num-one million in year-six and $num-two million in year-five.
through the first three quarters of year-six, our box shipment volume is up num-one% on a per day basis versus the industry being up num-two%.
this will result of negative impact of $num-one per share moving from the third quarter to the fourth quarter and $num-two per share higher than last year's fourth quarter.
and lastly, as bob mentioned, we expect scheduled outage cost to be approximately $num-one per share higher than the third quarter.
the items were partially offset by operating costs, which were $num-one per share higher, primarily due to inflation-related increases, particularly in the areas of labor and benefits expenses, recycled fiber costs, energy, repairs, materials and supplies, as well as several other indirect and fixed cost areas.
for the last several quarters, freight and logistics costs have risen, and were $num-one per share higher compared to last year, driven by significant increases in fuel costs, tight truck supply, driver shortages, and the higher mix of spot pricing to keep up with box demand.