year-six started strong, earning $num-one per share compared to $num-two per share in the first quarter of year-five.
we also experienced num-one% customer growth and positive weather-normalized sales growth, both within our expected guidance for the first quarter compared to the same period in year-five.
i'll close my comments by sharing that daniel froetscher, president and chief operating officer, will retire this august after serving nearly num-one years with the company.
to support the expansion of businesses, phoenix is projected to add num-one million square feet of new industrial space in year-six, placing the valley second nationwide after dallas according to a study by commercialsearch.
chris camacho, the greater phoenix economic council president and ceo, said the organization is working with num-one companies that are considering relocating or expanding in the phoenix area.
since implementation in august of last year, this software has reduced our inventory by nearly $num-one million, which mitigates potential inventory write-off risk in the future.
these programs contributed to our overall year-five energy efficiency savings of nearly num-one megawatt hours and they will contribute to reducing lifetime carbon emissions by an estimated num-two billion pounds.
in the regulatory space, we appreciate the commission's balanced decision to implement our annual power supply adjusted rate change, num-one% in april and num-one% in november, instead of our typical [date] implementation date.
we're also procuring an additional num-one megawatts of seasonal peaking capacity, including hydro power, and we expanded our contract up to num-two megawatts for demand response from our commercial and industrial customers to help ensure that we've got adequate resources through the year-six summer season.
last year, we announced the addition of num-one megawatts of battery storage to be located on six of our aps-owned solar sites.
this represents a num-one% increase over last year for industrial construction.
for year-six, we expect the increased bad debt expense associated with the summer disconnect moratorium and covid disconnect moratorium will result in a negative impact to our year-six operating results of approximately $num-one million to $num-two million pre-tax compared to prior years that did not have a disconnect moratorium.
customer enrollment in our cool rewards program surpassed num-one connected smart thermostats.
as an update on our customer delinquent account balances, the cumulative total dollar amount of all residential accounts in arrears has decreased num-one% since [date], year-five.