adjusting for special items, third quarter earnings from ongoing operations were $num-one per share compared with $num-two per share a year ago.
today, we announced third quarter reported earnings of $num-one per share.
our third quarter results bring our year-to-date earnings from ongoing operations to $num-one per share.
this reflects special items of $num-one per share primarily related to losses on the early extinguishment of debt associated with the recapitalization of the balance sheet post the sale of wpd.
third quarter results were $num-one per share, a $num-two per share increase compared to qtr-three year-five results.
our pennsylvania regulated segment recorded $num-one per share for the third quarter, which was $num-two per share lower compared to a year ago.
results at corporate and other were a loss of $num-one per share, which was $num-two higher compared to a year ago.
on august num-one, ppl electric utilities announced a constructive settlement with an alliance of industrial and municipal customers that had challenged the company's ferc-approved base transmission return on equity.
in addition to our updates on capex opportunities, we've also revised our expectations for share repurchases and have allocated an additional $num-one million to buybacks.
we've already completed $num-one million in share repurchases through [date].
we now expect to repurchase a total of approximately $num-one billion of ppl common stock by year-end, effectively doubling the amount previously announced on our qtr-two call.
overall, the settlement is expected to reduce net income by approximately $num-one million to $num-two million per year.
the settlement, which must be approved by ferc, would change ppl electric's base roe from num-one% to num-two% from may year-five to may year-seven with the rate stepping up to num-three% by june year-eight.
after that date, we plan to realign the dividend, targeting a payout ratio of num-one% to num-two% of the repositioned ppl earnings as previously communicated.
the settlement also updates the equity component of ppl electric's capital structure to be the lower of its actual equity component calculated in accordance with the formula rate template or num-one%.
these teams have built robust day num-one integration plans to execute on identified business requirements; extracted transition service agreements that will be key to providing a stable, seamless transition for customers; redesigned critical business processes to enable the tsas to effectively operate; designed a new rhode island operating model and organization from the ground up, with over num-two national grid employees accepting employment offers pending the close of the transaction.