ppl delivered fourth-quarter year-five earnings from ongoing operations of $num-one per share compared to $num-two per share in the fourth quarter of year-four.
the estimated impact of covid on our fourth-quarter results was about $num-one per share, $num-two due to lower u.k. sales volumes and $num-two driven by lower demand in kentucky.
weather in the quarter was about $num-one unfavorable compared to year-four, as our kentucky segment experienced slightly milder temperatures.
we achieved year-five earnings from ongoing operations of $num-one per share compared to $num-two per share a year ago.
regulated segment earned $num-one per share, a $num-two year-over-year decrease.
this achievement included overcoming a $num-one per share unfavorable impact from covid, due primarily to low sales volumes in the u.k. and lower commercial and industrial demand in kentucky, as well as a $num-two per share unfavorable impact due to mild weather compared to normal conditions.
we also received the u.k.'s customer service excellence award for the num-txth time since num-one.
in terms of dilution for the year, we experienced $num-one per share of dilution year over year, primarily reflecting the impact of the equity forward settlement in late year-four.
lg&e and ku filed rate requests with the kentucky public service commission on [date], seeking approval for a combined revenue increase of about $num-one million in electricity and gas base rates.
we earned $num-one per share in year-five, a $num-two increase over comparable results one year ago.
those increases include $num-one million in kentucky to support full deployment of advanced metering infrastructure, $num-two million in pennsylvania for additional transmission investments, as well as incremental funding for it initiatives focused on digital transformation investments in work optimization, smart grid technology and the customer experience and $num-three million in the u.k. due to a shift of certain investments from year-five to year-six as a result of covid, additional funding for telecommunications projects and updates to our riio-etxt-num capital plan.
in addition, our safari energy business also added more than num-one megawatts of solar capacity to its portfolio, increasing its own capacity to num-two megawatts.
as vince mentioned earlier, our year-five financial results reflect an estimated $num-one unfavorable variance due to covid.
c&i sectors has lagged our domestic jurisdictions overall, but has continued to make a strong comeback, down about num-one% versus the prior year, a substantial improvement from the second-quarter lows of over num-two%.
in other notable kentucky updates, lg&e and ku on [date] issued a request for proposal for generation capacity to meet a potential energy shortfall that may be created by the anticipated retirements of num-one megawatts of coal-fired generation during this decade.
we've outlined more than $num-one billion from year-six to year-ten to support continued modernization of our transmission and distribution networks and to advance a cleaner energy future.