adjusted operating revenues of $num-one million increased num-two% compared to the second quarter of year-five, while diluted adjusted operating income per share of $num-three rose num-four%.
barring an unforeseen period of market uncertainty, which would have a negative impact on investor sentiment, we expect third quarter investment sales to grow in the num-one% to num-two% range versus last year's third quarter.
we estimate the mortgage business will earn around $num-one million in pre-tax earnings during the second half of year-six for a full year total of $num-two million.
roae also increased to num-one% compared to num-two% during the same quarter last year.
looking at the third quarter, we estimate $num-one million in covid claims for the quarter based on an estimated num-two population deaths, including num-three deaths in canada.
if the improvement is in the num-one% range, margins would likely increase num-two to num-three basis points from where they were prior to the pandemic.
net inflows at $num-one billion during the quarter were twice the level in the prior year period and slightly above the $num-two billion in the first quarter of year-six.
we ended the quarter with client asset values of $num-one billion, a num-two% increase year-over-year, combining strong equity markets and nearly $num-three billion of net new inflows over the last num-four months.
looking ahead, as we see trends normalizing, we project full year-over-year life sales to decline approximately num-one% versus last year's elevated levels.
we remain committed to growing our sales force and expect to end the year at around num-one life licensed representatives after all the covid-temp licenses and extended renewals have expired compared to a normalized count of num-two at the end of year-five.
operating revenues of $num-one million increased num-two% and pre-tax income of $num-three million was num-four%.
adding $num-one million to pre-tax income over baseline year-four levels.
the compounding impact of sustained higher sales and policy retention over the last five quarters drove num-one% growth in adjusted direct premiums year-over-year.
sales exceeded $num-one billion for the first time in history with solid demand from both the u.s. and canada clients and across all product lines, including mutual funds, annuities and managed accounts.
we ended the quarter with about num-one life license representatives, including a total of num-two individuals with either covid temporary licenses or a license with an extended renewal date.
productivity remains above our historical range at num-one policies per life license representative per month and total face amount grew to $num-two billion in force at quarter end.