you can see on the slide here, there's no change to our full year oil production guidance range of $num-one to $num-two barrels of oil per day and total production of num-three to num-four boes per day.
when combined with the base dividend, total dividend payments in the third quarter will be greater than $num-one per share, or a total of approximately $num-two million return to shareholders during the third quarter alone.
similarly, on capital, it's unchanged at $num-one billion to $num-two billion, but we are seeing some inflationary pressure, although most of it is being offset by our efficiency improvements by the great work power of drilling and completions and facilities teams.
obviously, we're very excited after talking about it for num-one months to announce that we are both accelerating our first variable dividend payment into the third quarter this year as well as increasing the payment to reflect num-two% of second quarter free cash flow.
you can see with the increase in commodity prices, our forecasted operating cash flow has increased to $num-one billion, and free cash flows increased to $num-two billion that scott talked about.
in total, pioneer generated approximately $num-one billion in free cash flow in the first half of year-six.
both of those are up $num-one million from what we forecasted in our may call related to qtr-one earnings.
pioneer's strong execution continued during the second quarter, with production near the top end of guidance, delivering over $num-one million of free cash flow, driving estimated year-six free cash flow up to about $num-two billion.
horizontal lease operating expense dropped by nearly $num-one per boe when compared to the first quarter.
additionally, we are increasing the third quarter variable dividend payment to num-one%, post base dividend free cash flow from the previous num-two%.
going to slide eight, positioning a leading dividend yield across all sectors, the combination of pioneer's expected free cash flow and return on capital framework creates a compelling investment opportunity with a total dividend yield that will exceed all s&p num-one sectors as well as companies and the average yield of the major oil companies and all other energy companies in the s&p num-one.
considering the greater than $num-one billion of cumulative free cash flow, this program generates over $num-two billion of total dividends through num-three, with the remaining free cash flow allocated toward strengthening our balance sheet, driving net debt to ebitda to less than num-four.
annualized expected dividends paid in the second half of year-six leads to a dividend yield of approximately num-one%, which increases year-seven to year-gen time period to an average greater than num-two% due significant free cash flow.
these changes result in over $num-one billion of incremental cash to be returned to shareholders in year-six, with total dividends to exceed $num-two per share.
apollo, who was the largest shareholder from doublepoint, our largest shareholder from doublepoint has sold out from num-one million shares to about two million shares and now less than num-two% of the outstanding of the company.
on slide six, we remain committed to our core investment thesis, predicated on low leverage, strong corporate returns to average over the next five years in the mid-teens, low investment rate, around num-one% over the next five years and generating significant free cash flow.