the above factors led to net income for the fourth quarter of fiscal year-five of $num-one million compared to $num-two million in the prior year, while diluted earnings per share decreased from $num-three to $num-four.
sales were based upon num-one million gallons this year versus num-two million in the prior year fourth quarter.
sales for the quarter increased approximately num-one%, primarily reflecting higher year-over-year production in the ethanol segment and increased distillers grain pricing.
sg&a decreased for the fourth quarter from $num-one million to $num-two million, largely due to lower ethanol freight charges recorded in selling, general and administration due to certain contract terms.
the company recorded income from its unconsolidated equity investment of $num-one for the fourth quarter of this year versus $num-two million in the prior year.
gross profit for the ethanol and by-products segment increased for the fourth quarter from $num-one million to $num-two million, primarily due to improved distillers and corn oil pricing.
the refined coal segment had a similar fourth quarter loss of $num-one million for this year versus a $num-two million for the prior year.
we recognized a tax benefit of $num-one million in this year's fourth quarter versus a benefit of $num-two million in the prior year's fourth quarter.
in terms of going forward with our cash, we have about $num-one million in consolidated cash and equivalents, no debt, our plants are continuing to explore investing in carbon and carbon capture, we've made progress there and have spent a fair amount of time on working on that project.
january year-six export totaled num-one million gallons compared to num-two million gallons in january.
the refined coal segment contributed a benefit of $num-one million this year versus $num-two million in the prior year fourth quarter for the tax benefit.
the estimated corn yield is num-one bushels per acre and ethanol plants are expected to consume approximately num-two billion bushels in year-six crop year.
export of the distillers grains in year-five was approximately num-one million tons compared to num-two million in year-four.
ethanol export during year-five totaled of num-one billion gallons compared to num-two billion gallons of year-four.
march num-txth report of the usda showed that carry-out stayed at num-one billion bushels with export at num-two billion bushels.