this resulted in net income for the fourth quarter increasing from $num-one million to $num-two million and the diluted earnings per share increasing from $num-three to $num-four.
uses of this cash, which we're now -- we're certainly now actively looking at include possible buybacks, about num-one shares remain authorized.
the refined coal segment had a gross loss of $num-one million for this year's fourth quarter versus $num-two million for the prior year with the decrease reflecting lower demand at the facility.
sales were based upon num-one million gallons this year versus num-two million gallons in the prior year fourth quarter.
sales for the quarter increased approximately num-one%, primarily reflecting higher year-over-over ethanol pricing.
the company recorded income from its unconsolidated equity investment of $num-one million for the fourth quarter of this year versus the loss of $num-two in the prior year.
consolidated cash is about $num-one million.
sg&a expense increased for the fourth quarter from $num-one million to $num-two million, largely due to higher ethanol freight charges recorded in sg&a due to certain contract terms.
the refined coal segment contributed a benefit of $num-one million this year versus $num-two million in the prior year fourth quarter, reflecting the aforementioned lower demand at the facility.
gross profit for the ethanol and by-products segment increased for the fourth quarter from $num-one million to $num-two million, primarily due to improved crush spreads in the early part of the fourth quarter, which fell off as the quarter progressed.
sales for the full year were based upon num-one million gallons this year versus num-two million gallons in the prior year.
u.s. export of distiller grains in year-four was num-one million metric tons, down num-two% from year-three.
we recognized tax benefit of $num-one million in this year's fourth quarter versus a benefit of $num-two million in the prior year's fourth quarter.
total ethanol production in year-four was num-one billion gallons compared to num-two billion gallons in year-three.
in year-four, ethanol export decreased to [phonetic] num-one billion gallon compared to num-two billion gallon in year-three.
this is the same company that num-one years ago sold tvs.