we're very pleased with our performance this quarter as we achieved earnings of $num-one million, resulting in earnings per share of $num-two.
we anticipate being back in the repurchase market this quarter and expect to manage common equity tier num-one to the midpoint of our num-two% to num-three% operating range by year-end.
including ppp and the enerbank acquisition, linked quarter net interest income is expected to grow between num-one% and num-two% in the fourth quarter.
adjusted pre-tax pre-provision income increased num-one% sequentially.
adjusted non-interest expenses increased num-one% in the quarter, as higher salary and benefits and professional and legal fees were offset by decline in marketing expenses.
and we continue to expect they will remain num-one% to num-two% below pre-pandemic levels.
net interest income from ppp loans decreased $num-one million from the prior quarter, but is expected to pick up in the fourth quarter.
share repurchases were temporarily paused ahead of the enerbank closing, which absorbed approximately $num-one billion of capital in the fourth quarter.
and based on analysis of pandemic-related deposit inflow characteristics, we currently believe approximately num-one% or $num-two billion to $num-three billion of deposit increases can be used to support longer-term growth through the rate cycle.
roughly num-one% of that amount has either been recognized or is locked into future earnings from hedge terminations reflecting the dynamic management of our hedging strategy.
salaries and benefits increased num-one%, primarily due to higher variable-based compensation associated with elevated fee income as well as one additional day in the third quarter.
cash averaged $num-one billion during the quarter and when combined with ppp, reduced third quarter reported margin by num-two basis points.
adjusted non-interest income increased num-one% from the prior quarter, primarily attributable to strong capital markets' activity, including record loan syndication revenue and solid m&a advisory fees.
excluding excess cash and ppp, net interest income grew almost num-one% linked quarter, and our adjusted margin was essentially stable at num-two%.
in addition, production remained strong with a line of credit commitments increasing $num-one billion year-to-date.
adjusted average and ending loans increased approximately num-one% during the quarter.