looking ahead, we expect capital markets to generate quarterly revenue in the $num-one million to $num-two million range on average.
average and ending adjusted loans declined num-one% from the prior quarter.
based on this quarter's credit performance and the improving economic outlook, we reduced our allowance for credit losses by $num-one million more than net charge-offs, while still maintaining one of the strongest allowance to loan ratios in the industry at num-two%.
adjusted non-interest income decreased num-one% from the prior quarter, but reflects a num-two% increase compared to the first quarter of year-five.
based on current expectations, we believe the peak is behind us, and we expect full year year-six net charge-offs to range from num-one basis points to num-two basis points.
based on our internal stress testing framework and amount of capital we need to run our business, we are updating our operating range for common equity tier num-one to num-two% to num-three% with a goal of managing to the midpoint over time.
higher average hedge notional values drove a $num-one million increase compared to the fourth quarter.
net interest margin declined during the quarter to num-one%.
with respect to capital, our common equity tier num-one ratio increased approximately num-two basis points to an estimated num-three% this quarter.
ppp related nii declined $num-one million from the prior quarter, as the benefits from round two were offset by slower round one forgiveness.
interest bearing deposit costs fell num-one basis points in the quarter to num-two basis points contributing $num-three million and num-four basis point of margin.
loan hedges added $num-one million to nii and num-two basis points to the margin.
net interest income decreased num-one% on a reported basis or num-two% excluding the impact from day count and ppp.
at current rate levels, we expect a little over $num-one million of hedge related interest income each quarter until the hedges begin to mature in year-eight.
within the quarter, we repositioned a total of $num-one billion of cash flow swaps and floors targeting less protection in year-eight and year-nine.
although, we expect the impact of these changes will be partially offset by continued account growth, we estimate year-six service charges will grow compared to year-five, but remain approximately num-one% to num-two% below year-four levels.