for the second quarter of year-six, net sales were $num-one million and diluted earnings were $num-two per share.
for the comparable prior year period, net sales were $num-one million and diluted earnings were $num-two per share.
upon receiving the $num-one quarterly dividend, shareholders will have received over $num-two of dividends per share thus far in year-six.
we estimate that year-six capital expenditures will be approximately $num-one million predominantly related to new product development.
the estimated unit sell-through of the company's products from the independent distributors to retailers increased num-one% in the first half of year-six compared to the prior year period.
for the first six months of year-six, net sales were $num-one million and diluted earnings were $num-two per share.
as a reminder, our quarterly dividend is approximately num-one% of net income and, therefore, varies quarter-to-quarter.
for the corresponding period in year-five, net sales were $num-one million and diluted earnings were $num-two per share.
we reinvested $num-one million of that back into the company in the form of capital expenditures.
and despite the growth in our output at the end of the second quarter of year-six, our finished goods inventory and distributor inventories of ruger products were num-one units lower than they were at the end of the first quarter of year-five.
in the first half of year-six, new product sales represented $num-one million or num-two% of firearm sales compared to $num-three million or num-four% of firearm sales in the first half of year-five.
our board of directors declared a $num-one per share quarterly dividend for shareholders of record as of august num-two, year-six, payable on august num-three, year-six.
since march of year-five, our workforce has been strengthened by approximately num-one folks, an increase of num-two%, and our quarterly unit production has increased by over num-three units or num-four%.
during the first half of year-six, we generated $num-one million of cash from operations.
the wrangler revolver, our latest take on the classic single-action revolver, which shows no signs of slowing down and the max-num-one pistol, a versatile num-txtillimeter pistol that has been met with tremendous excitement.
our current ratio was num-one:num-two, and we had no debt.