the last topic i want to touch on is our updated year-six offo per share guidance of $num-one to $num-two, which is up $num-three at the midpoint of our prior guidance range of $num-four to $num-five.
first quarter operating ffo per share of $num-one was up $num-two versus last quarter, driven by our improving rent collections as we experienced a decline in rent not probable collection and abatement, which totaled $num-three million in the quarter, down from $num-four million last quarter.
further, as disclosed on page num-one of our supplemental, our first quarter rental income, excluding prior year amounts, has ticked up since last quarter and is now only down num-two% from first quarter of year-five despite the continued nonpayment of our theater tenants who have remained closed since the onset of the pandemic.
occupancy for the quarter was num-one%, down num-two basis points sequentially due primarily to the proactive and planned recapture of our space at our troy marketplace and west broward properties that will facilitate new grocer deals.
also assumed in our forecast are $num-one million of net acquisitions at our pro rata share.
as with any debt issuance, we look to maintain a flat maturity ladder with a goal of having no more than num-one% of our debt stack maturing in any given year.
the first tranche of num-one parcels closed on march five for just over $num-two million.
additionally, we are in active contract negotiations on several other deals and have embedded a total of $num-one million of net acquisitions at our pro rata share and after parcel sales to rgmz into our guidance.
given our strong leasing activity, we ended the first quarter with a signed not open backlog of $num-one million, the majority of which will come online over the next num-two months.
blended rent spreads were up num-one% as we achieved a num-two% comparable new lease spread, our best quarterly spread in almost three years, driven by our troy marketplace grocery deal that brian previously noted.
as we've previously noted, the $num-one million initial seed sale to rgmz will close in tranches over the course of year-six.
we ended the first quarter with net debt to annualized adjusted ebitda of num-one times, down from num-two times last quarter.
we started year-six on a high note, signing num-one deals in the quarter covering num-two square feet.
consistent with our thesis regarding the value dislocation between multi-tenant and net lease properties, our effective acquisition yield on the retained multi-tenant asset could improve by up to num-one basis points after the acquisition and parcelization processes close.
as of quarter end, $num-one million of our recurring billings for the trailing num-two months remain outstanding, of which $num-two million has been reserved with the majority of the $num-three million balance expected to be repaid over the course of year-six and year-seven.
although the incremental return on capital is tighter than our typical underwriting, we believe that attracting a premier grocer at this already strong center will create significant value via cap rate compression of almost num-one basis points and position the asset for success for years to come.