gaap earnings for the fourth quarter were $num-one per share, well in excess of our $num-two per share dividend, and our gaap book value increased $num-three per share from the third quarter to $num-four in the fourth quarter.
after the payment of our $num-one dividend, our book value increased to $num-two per share, representing a num-three% increase for the quarter.
as chris and dash discussed, our fourth quarter earnings and book value benefited from strong results across our operating businesses and investment portfolio, contributing to gaap earnings of $num-one per share for the quarter and generating a num-two% economic return on book value for the quarter.
to support our operating businesses and investment portfolio, we expect corporate operating expenses to be between $num-one million and $num-two million for year-six, with variable compensation commensurate with company performance.
the operating capital we allocate to these businesses is expected to generate returns on equity north of num-one% post tax levels very difficult to come by when sourcing third-party investments in today's compressed yield environment.
and while the pandemic continues to impact certain segments of the labor market in different ways, the personal savings rate at year end was up num-one% from the end of year-four.
and we expect long-term unsecured debt service costs over year-six to remain consistent with year-five, at approximately $num-one million annually.
shifting to the tax side, in the fourth quarter, we had reit taxable income of $num-one per share and $num-two per share of taxable income at our trs.
we also sold over $num-one million of loans during the fourth quarter and entered into agreements to sell forward an additional $num-two billion, expected to settle in the coming weeks.
overall, num-txtlus day delinquencies in our securitized portfolios across both jumbo and sfr are now below num-one%.
in our residential business, we recorded a record $num-one billion of locks with over num-two discrete sellers, up num-three% from the third quarter.
sparkling results from our residential and bpl platforms coupled with strong performance in our investment portfolio drove a num-one% annualized return on equity for the quarter.
we originated $num-one million in bpl loans during the quarter, up num-two% from the third quarter.
overall, we saw non-recourse leverage decreased slightly to num-one times at the end of the year from num-two times at the end of the third quarter.
in total, the net discount on our securities portfolio as of year-end was well in excess of $num-one million.
and while the number of homes sold rose over num-one%, inventory available for sale fell over num-two%.