adjusted diluted earnings per share was $num-one compared to $num-two a year ago.
as you can see on slide seven, net interest income of $num-one million declined $num-two million from the prior quarter.
we were very pleased with the fundamentals of our core performance including period end loan growth of $num-one billion, deposit growth of $num-two billion and core transaction deposit growth of more than $num-three million.
however, the core net interest margin declined num-one basis points from the prior quarter, slightly more than our original expectations due to the more significant reduction in interest rates.
adjusted non-interest revenue of $num-one million grew $num-two million from fourth quarter benefiting from significant activity in mortgage, capital markets and fiduciary businesses.
in this easing cycle, the fomc cut their target rate by num-one basis points and our general expectation is for cycle betas to end in the low to mid num-txt as deposits repriced throughout the year.
with the increased level of covid related expenses, which we currently estimate of $num-one million to $num-two million in the second quarter we expect adjusted expenses to remain relatively stable quarter-on-quarter before declining in the second half of the year.
the core net interest margin, which excludes paa decreased num-one basis points from the prior quarter to num-two%.
on slide eight, you will see that we have had continued success in fee revenue generation, which increased to $num-one million adjusted.
excluding those impacts, we reiterate that we expect the margin to decline num-one basis points to num-two basis points per num-three basis point decrease.
since the launch of txt-num on [date], our team has processed, approved and funded more than $num-one billion in loans for num-two customers.
adjusted non-interest expense totaled $num-one million for the quarter, up $num-two million versus the previous quarter, largely due to the $num-three million increase in seasonal payroll taxes that were referenced during our fourth quarter earnings call.
adjusted expenses increased $num-one million from the prior quarter, generally in line with our prior guidance.
that's an increase of $num-one million from the prior quarter and up $num-two million or num-three% versus the prior year.
among other actions our shareholders overwhelmingly approved the elimination of our num-one -num-two voting structure and super majority voting requirements.
the majority of that decline or $num-one million was attributable to the expected decline in purchase accounting adjustments.