we reported earnings per share of negative $num-one compared to negative $num-two per share in the same period of year-five.
adjusted earnings per share was negative $num-one per share compared to negative earnings per share of $num-two in the first quarter of year-five.
for the year, we expect free cash flow to be between negative, $num-one million and $num-two million.
we expect our free cash flow usage for the year will be between $num-one million and $num-two million.
operating margin for the first quarter was negative num-one% compared to negative num-two% in the first quarter of year-five.
in year-six, we are planning to deliver about num-one, num-two max shipsets as mark just said, which is more than double what we delivered in year-five.
overall, deliveries decreased to num-one shipsets compared to num-two shipsets in the same quarter of last year.
free cash flow for the quarter was a use of $num-one million, compared to a use of $num-two million in the same period of year-five.
interest expense and financing fee amortization in the first quarter of year-six increased $num-one million, driven by increased interest expense on debt and higher interest rates compared to the same period in the prior year.
during the first quarter of year-six, an incremental $num-one million valuation allowance on deferred income tax assets was recorded.
turning to deliveries, wide-body program deliveries were num-one, down from num-two in the first quarter of year-five, which is a num-three% reduction.
as tom mentioned, we are planning to repay $num-one billion in debt in the next three years, the timing of which will be in line with how air traffic and narrow-body production rates recover from the global pandemic.
we believe our defense business revenue is on track to grow num-one% this year, after growing nearly num-two% in year-five.
we are closely monitoring the remaining regulatory approvals needed for the num-one max return to service, as well as the recovery from the global pandemic.
on the txt-num, schedule changes this year and next year contributed to the forward loss of $num-one million that we announced this quarter.
this year-over-year improvement is primarily due to favorable working capital management and cost-reduction efforts, partially offset by the absence of the $num-one million received last february, as a result of the moa with boeing.