we reported earnings per share of negative $num-one compared to negative $num-two per share in the same period of year-five.
adjusted earnings per share was negative $num-one compared to earnings per share of $num-two in the second quarter of year-five.
based on our preliminary assessment, we expect to incur an incremental forward loss of approximately $num-one million to $num-two million in the third quarter of year-six due to the impact of reduced production volumes and the corresponding amount of fixed overhead absorption applied to lower deliveries.
revenue for the quarter was $num-one billion, up num-two% from the same quarter of last year and approximately num-three% above the first quarter of year-six.
looking at the operating margin, we saw improvement in the second quarter to negative num-one% and compared to negative num-two% in the second quarter of year-five.
the second quarter cash from operations also reflect an improvement of $num-one million as compared to the first quarter of year-six.
we are maintaining our year-six free cash flow guidance of negative $num-one million to $num-two million.
free cash flow for the quarter was negative $num-one million compared to negative -- $num-two million negative in the same period of year-five.
this quarter, we also continued work with boeing to address fit and finish issues on the num-one program, and we'll continue to coordinate with them to complete all necessary rework.
despite this forward loss, we are maintaining our free cash flow target of negative $num-one million to $num-two million, as indicated on our last earnings call.
these business aircraft inventories are down around num-one% year-over-year, highlighting a strong demand.
in the second quarter, we recognized forward loss charges of $num-one million, primarily driven by engineering analysis and rework on the num-two program compared to forward loss charges of $num-three million in the same period of year-five.
a recent international air transport association report indicates domestic passenger market show improvement, but with demand still down num-one% versus june year-four levels.
ryanair took delivery of its first num-one max num-two and had positive feedback.
additionally, u.s. business jet flight activity is about num-one% higher than prepandemic levels, another good indicator of a rebound in this market segment.
for the year, we expect to deliver num-one num-two shipsets, up from just num-three in year-five.