net income in the quarter increased to $num-one million and earnings per share were $num-two.
ebit margin for the quarter was num-one% of revenue, an increase of num-two basis points from the second quarter of last year.
for the quarter, constant currency organic revenue increased num-one%, with growth across all segments.
as we look at the second half of the fiscal year, we anticipate that higher material labor costs will continue to impact gross margin by approximately $num-one million or more.
combined, material and labor costs were about $num-one million in the quarter, significantly higher than we were expecting.
the adjusted effective tax rate in the quarter was num-one%, higher than last year, but in line with our expectations for the full fiscal year.
gross margin for the quarter increased num-one basis points compared to the prior year to num-two%, as favorable productivity, pricing and acquisitions were somewhat offset by higher material and labor costs.
lastly, our newest segment, dental, reported num-one% growth for the quarter, in line with our expectations.
growth was driven by organic volume as well as num-one basis points of price.
of the approximately $num-one million in acquired revenue, about num-two% is consumable revenue from both key and cantel medical, about num-three% of the balance is capital equipment revenue, with the last num-four% being service revenue.
during the first half, capital expenditures totaled $num-one million, while depreciation and amortization was $num-two million, reflecting recent acquisitions.
at the end of the quarter, cash totaled $num-one million.
the total cash settlement value was approximately $num-one million.
our leverage ratio at the end of the second quarter is now below num-one times.
healthcare has also rebounded nicely, with num-one% constant currency organic growth in the first half and record backlog of $num-two million at the end of the quarter for the legacy steris products.
and our capital equipment business backlog has grown to a record $num-one million.