our first quarter net income attributable to sxc was $num-one per share, up $num-two versus the prior-year period, mainly driven by our logistics segment performance.
we achieved record-setting first quarter results with adjusted ebitda of $num-one million, a num-two% improvement over qtr-one year-five.
given our very strong first quarter year-six results and looking at the aptxt-num forward curve, we now expect to deliver at the higher end or possibly even exceed our logistics adjusted ebitda guidance range of $num-one million to $num-two million.
we now expect results at the top end of our year-six guidance of $num-one million to $num-two million.
looking at our capital structure and deployment of cash in the first quarter, we reduced debt by $num-one million during the quarter and continued to execute on our deleveraging initiative, while also maintaining our $num-two per share quarterly dividend.
we also paid dividends worth $num-one million at the rate of $num-two per share during the quarter.
we expect to handle approximately num-one million tons of coal at cmt as compared to our original guidance of num-two million to num-one million tons, along with num-three million to num-four million tons of other products for which the guidance remains unchanged.
we are well on our way to achieving our long-term gross leverage target of num-one times or lower by the end of this year.
adjusted ebitda came in at $num-one million in the first quarter of year-six, up $num-two million versus the first quarter of year-five.
the logistics business generated $num-one million of adjusted ebitda during the first quarter of year-six as compared to $num-two million in the prior year period.
in total, we ended the quarter with a strong liquidity position of approximately $num-one million.
cmt handled num-one million more tons versus the prior-year period, mainly driven by higher coal exports and iron ore.
the increase in adjusted ebitda is primarily due to higher throughput volumes at cmt. our logistics business handled num-one million tons of throughput volumes during the quarter as compared to num-two million tons during the prior-year period.
first quarter adjusted ebitda per ton was $num-one on num-two,num-three sales ton.
the increase was primarily due to approximately num-one million tons of higher throughput volumes at our logistics segment.
when adding in slightly favorable results in corporate and other, we ended first quarter at $num-one million of adjusted ebitda.