adjusted earnings per share was $num-one in the first quarter of year-seven compared to $num-two a year ago.
we also declared our num-txth consecutive quarterly cash dividend on october num-txth of $num-one per share, approximately num-two% increase over the prior four quarterly dividend payments.
consolidated organic revenue growth of approximately num-one% year-on-year reflected strength at our electronics and scientific segment.
from a capital allocation perspective, we repurchased approximately num-one shares for $num-two million in fiscal first quarter year-seven, with approximately $num-three million remaining on our current repurchase authorization.
electronics revenue increased approximately num-one% year-on-year, primarily due to a broad-based geographical recovery with continued solid demand for relays in renewable energy and electric vehicle applications along with positive trends in transportation, appliance, test and measurement and distribution end-markets.
finally, we expect capital expenditures of approximately $num-one million to $num-two million in fiscal year-seven.
we expect that we will repatriate approximately $num-one million in cash in fiscal year-seven.
on a consolidated basis total revenue increased num-one% year-on-year from $num-two million in fiscal first quarter year-six to $num-three million this quarter.
this was partially offset by a $num-one million one-time project related charge at engineering technologies segment, and the financial impact of work stoppage in the specialty solutions segment which has since been resolved.
first quarter revenue at $num-one million was similar year-on-year due to positive trends in the space end-market balanced with the absence of the recently divested enginetics and the economic impact of covid on this segments end-markets.
year-on-year revenue decreased approximately $num-one million or num-two% and operating income was nearly $num-three million lower or num-four% decrease due to the timing of projects and geographic mix, partially offset by productivity actions.
revenue increased approximately $num-one million or num-two% year-on-year, including num-three% organic growth reflecting continued broad-based geographic and end-market strength, as well as a num-four% positive contribution from foreign exchange.
laneway sales of approximately $num-one million represented a num-two% increase year-on-year, including a positive demand outlook for soft trim tools, laser engraving and tool finishing.
we expect that second quarter tax rate will be similar to the first quarter rate, and that the overall tax rate for fiscal year-seven to be in the num-one% range.
our net debt to adjusted ebitda leverage ratio was approximately num-one times, with a net debt to total capital ratio of num-two%.
from a margin standpoint, adjusted consolidating operating margin of num-one% increased both, sequentially and year-on-year, and represented our second consecutive quarter of highest margin in standex's history.