based on our performance in the first nine months and including consideration of the aforementioned volatility impacting the recovery of elective procedures and the full year wright medical impact, we now expect adjusted net earnings per diluted share to be in the range of $num-one to $num-two.
adjusted net earnings per diluted share will be positively impacted by approximately $num-one to $num-two in the full year and this is included in our revised guidance range.
based on our performance in the third quarter, the continued volatility experienced as a result of covid, procedural delays in hospital staffing shortages as well as uncertainty around the pace of recovery in the fourth quarter, we expect year-six organic net sales growth to be in the range of num-one% to num-two%.
our third quarter earnings per share was positively impacted from foreign currency by $num-one.
our adjusted quarterly earnings per share of $num-one increased num-two% from year-four, reflecting sales growth, gross margin expansion and a lower quarterly effective tax rate, partially offset by the impact of business mix and higher interest charges resulting from the wright acquisition.
for the quarter, we posted organic sales growth of num-one% versus year-four, driven by excellent double-digit growth from our medsurg and neurotechnology businesses, but this was offset by softer sales of hip, knee and spine due to the resurgence of covid.
international organic growth of num-one%, again, outpaced growth in the us, representing robust performances and lessening impacts of covid across most major geographies, including strong results across europe, australia, canada and emerging markets.
outside the united states, sales have declined num-one% year-to-date, driven by timing of distributor conversions in latin america and asia pacific and declines in our legacy trauson and trauma business in china as a result of the provincial tendering process.
our adjusted earnings per share grew num-one% versus year-four, and we continued our focus on driving cash flow, leading to a year-to-date cash conversion of num-two%.
our adjusted gross margin of num-one% was favorable approximately num-two basis points from third quarter year-four.
international organic sales showed strong growth of num-one%, impacted by positive sales momentum in europe, australia, canada and emerging markets.
our year-to-date cash from operations was approximately $num-one billion.
endoscopy had us organic sales growth of num-one%, reflecting strong performances across their portfolio, including video and general surgery products and strong double digit growth of their communications and sports medicine businesses.
orthopaedics had constant currency sales growth of num-one% and organic sales growth of num-two%, including organic growth of num-three% in the us.
adjusted r&d spending was num-one% of sales, reflecting our continued focus on innovation.
if foreign currency exchange rates hold near current levels, we expect net sales in the full year will be positively impacted by approximately num-one%.