adjusted earnings per share for the quarter was $num-one.
consolidated adjusted earnings per share is expected to be in the $num-one to $num-two range.
first, we expect consolidated revenue growth in the low single-digit range with wireless service revenue growth of about num-one% plus for the full year.
adjusted ebitda was down num-one% for the quarter on a comparable basis.
for the year, earnings per share was up nearly num-one% with strong organic growth in mobility, lower interest, lower benefit costs, and higher investment gains.
apart from warnermedia's contributions, our communications segment ebitda was up approximately num-one% for the quarter.
free cash flow is expected to be in the $num-one billion range.
we added more than one million fiber subscribers for the fourth consecutive year, and full year broadband revenues were up num-one% as we returned our consumer wireline business to revenue growth.
we added num-one fiber customers even in a traditionally slow fourth quarter.
we remain on track to successfully shut down our num-txt network next month and expect num-txt shutdown impacts to peak in the first quarter of year-seven at about $num-one million.
in addition, we expect another $num-one million of expense in the first quarter associated with investment in our firstnet operations and the completion of support funding for the caf ii program.
num-one years ago, we began simplifying our business strategy to reposition at&t for growth.
this guidance reflects warnermedia's declining contributions due to anticipated investment initiatives, a num-one basis point increase in our effective tax rate and no anticipated investment gains.
the fourth quarter also included the impact of about $num-one million in directv advertising revenue sharing cost.
for the quarter, cash from operations was $num-one billion, spending increase year over year with capex of $num-two billion and gross capital investments totaling $num-three billion.
we expect warnermedia's full year contributions when including xandr to be revenues in the $num-one billion to $num-two billion range, ebitda in the $num-three billion to $num-four billion range, and free cash flow contribution of approximately $num-five billion as we expect year-seven to be the peak investment year for hbo max.