num-one net sales per hectoliter on a brand volume basis increased num-two% in constant currency as the net pricing growth more than offset the negative mix effects in canada and europe.
consolidated net sales revenue decreased num-one% in constant currency, principally due to lower financial volumes, which declined num-two% while brand volumes declined num-three%.
we also continue to anticipate underlying depreciation and amortization of $num-one million, net interest expense of $num-two million plus or minus num-three% and an effective tax rate in the range of num-four% to num-five%.
net debt was $num-one billion, down $num-two billion from [date], year-five and we ended the first quarter with a strong borrowing capacity with no outstanding balance on our $num-three billion u.s. credit facility as of [date], year-six.
and coors banquet posted its best quarterly volume performance in over num-one years in the united states.
in the u.s. brand volumes decreased num-one% compared to domestic shipment declines of num-two%, driven by the economy and premium segments.
driven by our commitment to maintaining any time upgrading our investment grade rating, we expect to continue to pay down debt and reaffirm our target net debt to underlying ebitda ratio of approximately num-one times by the end of year-six, and below num-two times by the end of year-seven.
and we had a strong qtr-one in panama, with over a num-one% increase in brand volumes with coors light's explosive triple-digit growth leading the way.
canada brand volumes declined num-one% primarily due to the on-premise closures, while latin america brand volumes grew num-one%.
europe net sales revenue was down num-one% in constant currency driven by volume declines and negative geographic and channel mix due to on-premise restrictions most meaningfully in the uk, given the on-premise lockdown for the full quarter.
net sales per hectoliter on a brand volume basis declined num-one% driven by unfavorable geographic channel and brand mix, particularly from our higher margin on-premise focused uk business, partially offset by positive pricing.
in a single week, topo chico hard seltzer jumped to num-one share u.s. hard seltzer category, despite only launching in num-two markets.
underlying cogs per hectoliter increased num-one% on a constant currency basis, driven by cost inflation and volume deleverage partially offset by cost savings.
europe financial volumes decreased num-one% and brand volumes decreased num-two% driven by a significant decline in brand volumes in the uk.
right now, we are shipping, over num-one million barrels a week in the united states for the first time in nearly a year.
underlying free cash flow was a use of $num-one million for the quarter, an increase in cash use of $num-two million from the prior year period driven by lower underlying ebitda and unfavorable working capital, driven by the timing of payments related to lower volumes, higher non-income tax deferrals due to governmental programs related to the coronavirus pandemic and incentive payments partially offset by lower capex spend.