in our business, we saw another quarter of sequential improvement in our commercial markets, with total commercial aftermarket revenues up num-one% over qtr-four of fiscal year-six and bookings up more than num-two% compared to qtr-four.
our total commercial oem revenue increased approximately num-one% in qtr-one compared with the prior year period.
the defense market revenue, which includes both oem and aftermarket revenues, decreased by approximately num-one% in qtr-one when compared with the prior year period.
as a final note, this margin guidance includes the unfavorable headwind of our cobham acquisition of about num-one%.
domestic air traffic for calendar year-six was only down num-one% compared to pre-pandemic versus international, which was still down num-two%.
iata currently forecasts a num-one% decrease in revenue passenger miles in calendar year year-seven compared to pre-pandemic levels.
sequentially, the bookings improved almost num-one% compared to qtr-four.
we now expect full year fiscal year-seven ebitda margin to be slightly north of num-one% due to the rate of commercial aftermarket recovery.
to reiterate what we said on the qtr-four earnings call, our teams are still planning for our commercial aftermarket revenue to grow in the num-one% to num-two% range.
this ratio is down from num-one times, at its peak.
about num-one% of our net sales are generated by proprietary products and over three quarters of our net sales come from products, which we believe we are the sole source provider.
we had strong operating cash flow generation of almost $num-one million and closed the quarter with a little over $num-two billion of cash.
commercial oem bookings came in even stronger with almost num-one% sequential improvement over qtr-four.
within iata's estimate is the expectation that domestic travel will be back to num-one% of pre-pandemic levels in calendar year year-seven.
the $num-one million revolver paydown is the primary reason that our cash balance ticked up much less than the $num-two million of free cash flow we generated in qtr-one.
we are now at a decision point with regard to our sizable cash balance, which is now approaching $num-one billion.