adjusted earnings per share was $num-one and gaap earnings per share was $num-two for the quarter which included restructuring acquisition and other charges of approximately $num-three.
these records include sales of over $num-one billion, adjusted earnings per share of $num-two and adjusted operating margins of over num-three%.
we expect sales to be up in the high teens over the year to approximately $num-one billion.
adjusted earnings per share is expected to be approximately $num-one and this will be up num-two% year-over-year.
another key factor that you see is that, we are continuing to demonstrate our strong free cash generation model, and continue to expect free cash flow conversion to approximately num-one% for this full fiscal year.
in the third quarter, sales of $num-one billion were better than our expectations and were up over num-two% year-over-year, demonstrating strong performance through the economic recovery with growth in all segments.
and we expect that these revenue levers will translate into strong performance with $num-one in adjusted earnings per share in the fourth quarter.
also on a sequential basis, sales were up num-one% and our earnings per share was up num-two% with sequential margin expansion in each segment.
for this fiscal year, we are expecting over num-one% growth in sales, approximately num-two basis points of adjusted operating margin expansion and over num-three% growth in adjusted earnings per share.
global auto production came in slightly lower than expected in the third quarter, and we're expecting auto production to be approximately num-one million units in our fourth quarter.
this acquisition has a purchase price of approximately $num-one million and is consistent with the bolt-on strategy around acquisitions that we talked to you about.
our content per vehicle has accelerated from the low $num-one range, a few years ago into the $num-two range this year.
in europe, our orders were down num-one% sequentially and in north america, our orders were essentially flat versus last quarter.
when you look at orders in the quarter, they remained strong at $num-one billion consistent with the levels we had in the second quarter.
compared to last quarter, industrial segment sales were up num-one%, driven by ongoing strength in industrial equipment and increases in energy and medical.
and in the communications segment, sales were up num-one% with double-digit growth in both data and devices and appliances on a sequential basis.