in the first quarter, we reported consolidated adjusted net income of num-one million, or $num-two per share, up from num-three million, or $num-four per share in the prior quarter.
lastly, teekay tankers recorded an adjusted net loss of $num-one million or, $num-two per share, which is an improvement of $num-three million, or $num-four per share compared to last quarter.
the partnership generated adjusted net income of $num-one million, or $num-two per unit, which is slightly better than the prior quarter.
we also generated total adjusted ebitda of num-one million, up slightly from the previous quarter.
as a reminder, the unit has been operating under a bareboat contract at a nominal day rate since we received an upfront cash payment of $num-one million in april year-five.
the partnership's lng fleet is now num-one% fixed for the remainder of year-six and num-two% fixed for year-seven.
separately, in april, we entered into a conditional agreement with cnr, whereby the customer will take over our remaining phase num-one decommissioning responsibilities on the banff field, which, when finalized, will effectively conclude and eliminate our remaining obligations related to the banff field after over num-two years of successful operations.
as such, in qtr-two, we expect to incur approximately $num-one million to $num-two million of costs relating to the towage and initial milestone payments to the recycling yard, which represents the most part of our remaining cost associated with the unit, with only minimal cost expected to be incurred after qtr-two.
in addition, we continue to see a strong correlation between global vaccination programs and the increase in oil demand, which we estimate to be approximately num-one% lower currently compared to the pre-pandemic levels.
however, the current level of oil production is stable at approximately num-one barrels per day, and oil prices are more than double the level that we experienced at this time one year ago.
regulatory authorities that teekay has completed all of its obligations in relation to phase num-one of the decommissioning project.
as highlighted last quarter, we have successfully completed phase num-one of our decommissioning project with net costs below budget.
lastly, teekay lng recently increased its quarterly common unit distribution by num-one% to $num-two per unit per annum.
this distribution level, which is supported by a large and diversified portfolio of long-term contracts, enables teekay lng to continue delevering its balance sheet, which provides financial flexibility to optimally allocate capital as the global demand for lng continues to grow while adding $num-one million per year to tk parent's free cash flow for a total of $num-two million per year in cash distributions from tgp.