in the fourth quarter, we reported a consolidated adjusted profit of $num-one million or $num-two per share, up from num-three in the prior quarter.
in fiscal year year-six, we reported a consolidated adjusted net profit of $num-one million or $num-two per share, compared to num-three million or $num-four per share in the prior year, and generated total adjusted ebitda of num-five million, compared to num-six billion in the prior year.
we also generated total adjusted ebitda of num-one million, up from num-two million in the previous quarter.
we have recently opportunistically invested $num-one million of our cash balance to further build our position in tnk, acquiring shares in the open market at an average price of $num-two per share.
based on tnk's closing price yesterday, our current position is valued at $num-one million or $num-two per teekay corp share.
lastly, we have now transformed our balance sheet and are now largely debt free with a net cash position of over $num-one million.
upon closing the sale, we expeditiously eliminated approximately num-one million of high-cost debt ranging between num-two% and num-three%.
on [date] of this year we successfully completed the sale of all of our interest in teekay lng to stonepeak, bringing in gross cash proceeds of approximately num-one million to teekay parent.
as vince mentioned earlier, we completed the sale of all our interest in teekay lng to stonepeak with teekay parent realizing total shareholder return of num-one% and an annual irr of num-two% since tgp's ipo in num-three.
we've had a presence in australia since num-one and we are now providing services for nine australian government vessels, which provides a solid and profitable foundation to further grow this business.
teekay parent is now largely debt free with a net cash position of over num-one million.
lastly, as mentioned earlier, our net cash position is over $num-one million equal to over $num-two per teekay corp share, and we can't stress enough the importance of having financial strength and flexibility as a critical ingredient to achieving higher returns and allowing us to be opportunistic and counter-cyclical.
this long-term contract business currently contributes as stable annual profit of num-one to $num-two million with potential for future growth.
with these purchases we now have an economic ownership of over num-one% and voting control of over num-two% in tnk.