the fourth quarter of year-four marked a return to profitability for teekay, as we recorded consolidated adjusted net income of $num-one million or $num-two per share compared to an adjusted net loss of $num-three million or $num-four per share in the same period of the prior year.
on the gas side we have significant declines in lng prices in asia and europe with asia reaching levels below $num-one per mmbtu, primarily due to the coronavirus outbreak and milder winter weather, which has put pressure on spot lng shipping rates.
we also generated total adjusted ebitda of $num-one million, an increase of $num-two million or num-three% from the same period in the prior year, excluding the contribution from teekay offshore which we sold in may of year-four.
this is compelling relative to tnk's closing share price yesterday of $num-one per share and equates to a free cash flow yield of num-two%.
teekay tankers reported record high adjusted net income in the fourth quarter, generating total adjusted ebitda of $num-one million, up from $num-two million in the same period of the prior year and adjusted net income of $num-three million, or $num-four per share, in the fourth quarter, an improvement from $num-five million or $num-six per share in the same period of the prior year.
teekay lng partners report a strong fourth quarter and fiscal year-four results that were within its guidance, generating total adjusted ebitda of $num-one million and adjusted net income of $num-two million or $num-three per unit, up significantly during the quarter compared to the same period of the prior year as growth projects continued to drive higher earnings and cash flows.
we expect these results to continue to grow in year-five with adjusted earnings per unit expected to be num-one% to num-two% higher than year-four.
in addition, we narrowed our consolidated adjusted net loss in the fiscal year year-four to $num-one million from $num-two million in year-three and we continue to expect year-five to be a profitable year.
on an annualized basis, the rates that we achieved in the fourth quarter of year-four would translate to over $num-one million of free cash flow or over $num-two per share.
looking ahead, we believe the medium-term fundamentals remain intact with a record year in year-four for new lng projects reaching final investment decision that are expected to start up in year-seven onwards, and long-term demand for lng expected to rise by num-one% to num-two% per year to num-three, as lng continues to displace coal.
also in early january, awilco lng fulfilled its obligation to repurchase two of tgp's lng carriers, resulting in receipt of over $num-one million in cash that was used to delever its balance sheet and increased its liquidity by over $num-two million.
our results were up compared to the fourth quarter of year-three, mainly as a result of lower interest expense due to bond repurchases over the past year and our bond refinancing completed in may year-four, higher contributions from the banff and hummingbird spirit fpso units, a num-one% increase in tgp's quarterly cash distribution and lower g&a expenses.
we expect our total adjusted ebitda to continue to grow in year-five with our gas cash flows expected to grow another num-one% to num-two% in year-five compared to year-four and a full year of potentially stronger earnings from our tanker business.
we have provided a graph of our annual total adjusted ebitda over the past three years that adjusted for our sale of teekay offshore has increased by num-one% since year-two, primarily underpinned by our stable and growing cash flows from our gas business that have increased by num-two% during this time.
on the balance sheet side, in january year-five, teekay parent eliminated $num-one million of debt guarantees previously provided to teekay tankers as a result of their $num-two million refinancing completed during that month and we fully repaid the remaining balance on our year-five unsecured bond with cash.
on the tanker side, crude spot tanker rates reached the highest level since num-one due to positive underlying tanker supply and demand fundamentals, normal winter seasonality, as well as one-off events such as us sanctions on cosco that removed num-two vlccs from the trading fleet, floating storage ahead of the implementation of imo year-five and the removal of vessels from the global trading fleet to retrofit scrubbers.