in fact, qtr-three ending backlog for the enterprise is up more than num-one% or approximately $num-two billion from year-end year-five with all three of our business segments at record levels.
adjusted earnings per share grew num-one%, driven primarily by higher adjusted operating income.
in the third quarter, we realized approximately $num-one million or num-two% incremental price, offsetting approximately $num-one million of inflation.
working closely with our key suppliers and with our customers, we anticipate that between $num-one million and $num-two million or roughly num-three% of the qtr-three impact will shift into the fourth quarter, leaving our year-six revenue guidance unchanged.
bookings were once again exceptional in qtr-three, building on strong growth in both qtr-one and qtr-two and bringing our year-to-date organic bookings growth to over num-one% for the enterprise.
as trailer oems have had a challenging year producing enough trailers to meet the forecast, act has gradually pulled the forecast down and is now projecting a strong but more gradual improvement in year-six, up num-one%, and continued improvement in production rates in both year-seven and year-eight, up another num-one% and num-two%, respectively.
we also highlighted on our second quarter earnings call that persistent inflation would require us to execute an incremental $num-one million in pricing actions in the second half of the year in order to neutralize the impact.
net adjusted ebitda and operating margins declined by num-one and num-two basis points, respectively.
as we outlined during our investor event in december, we're on track to deliver $num-one million of run rate savings by year-eight, including $num-two million in year-six.
organic revenues were also up num-one%, driven by continued strong price execution.
as i mentioned previously, we delivered low single-digit bookings growth in the quarter, compounding on nearly num-one% growth in the prior year.
revenue grew num-one% in the quarter.
importantly, we continue to see our year-six adjusted earnings per share growth guidance of more than num-one% as top quartile among peers in the broader industrials.
act started out the year projecting an almost immediate snapback in the north america trailer production in year-six, up num-one%, off the lows of the pandemic in year-five.
our asia pacific team delivered bookings growth of num-one%.
customer demand has been high all year, with organic bookings up over num-one% year-to-date, driving record backlog in each segment.