we continue to see about num-one points of revenue growth from the channel acquisitions, we announced last quarter, which will carry about five points of operating margin and deliver earnings per share accretion of about $num-two.
all-in, total revenue growth is expected to be approximately num-one%, and adjusted earnings per share is expected to be approximately $num-two, which translates to approximately num-three% earnings growth versus year-five.
we delivered double-digit bookings growth in all segments, growing our backlog over num-one% sequentially versus december year-five and up more than num-one% versus our already strong backlog at the end of year-four heading into year-five.
we delivered broad-based market outgrowth and share gains in each of our segments and business units, with total enterprise organic revenues up num-one%, while at the same time delivering more than num-two basis points of margin expansion in every segment and for the enterprise as a whole.
we expect to deliver strong organic leverage over num-one% for the full year, with organic leverage of approximately num-two% for the balance of the year.
all-in, we expect num-one% weighted average market growth for the year, reiterating our prior outlook.
although it's still early in the year and overall visibility remains limited, our strong quarter num-one performance, growing backlog, improving markets and asterism for improved vaccination rates gives us confidence to raise our full year year-six guidance for both revenue and adjusted earnings per share above the high end of the prior ranges.
we've raised our capital deployment expectations for year-six by $num-one million from approximately $num-two billion to $num-three billion to continue our commitment of deploying num-four% effective cash overtime.
transport markets, in particular, are expecting approximately num-one% market growth, given the current rates of economic improvement, reiterating our prior outlook.
as mike indicated earlier, we expect to deliver a strong organic financial performance with organic revenue growth of approximately num-one%, up from our previous guidance of between num-two% in num-three%.
adjusted earnings growth was also exceptional, up num-one%.
our asia pacific team delivered bookings growth of num-one% and revenue growth of num-two% in the quarter, laughing a soft qtr-one year-five that was heavily impacted by the covid pandemic.
all in, we expect to consistently deploy a num-one% of excess cash over time.
we've exceeded our initial cost reduction expectations, delivering $num-one million of savings in year-five, a full year early.
emea transport bookings were up over num-one% in the quarter and revenues are up high single digits, outperforming the broader transport markets.
we also continue to make excellent progress toward our transformation savings goal of $num-one million by year-eight and expect to realize approximately $num-two million in total savings in year-six.