this compares to $num-one billion or $num-two per share in the second quarter of year-five.
net income of $num-one billion and earnings per share also were quarterly records.
as you heard from lance, union pacific recorded record second quarter financials with earnings per share of $num-one and an operating ratio of num-two%.
rise in fuel prices throughout the quarter and the two month lag on our fuel surcharge programs, negatively impacted our quarterly ratio by num-one basis points, and earnings per share by $num-two.
our quarterly operating ratio of num-one% is an all-time record.
our second quarter volume was up num-one% from a year ago, as all of our major markets improved from the economic shutdown that we saw from the onset of the pandemic.
freight revenue was up num-one%, due to the volume increase coupled with a higher fuel surcharge and core pricing gains.
below the line, our previously announced real estate gain and a lower effective tax rate associated with reduced corporate tax rates in three states added $num-one to earnings per share.
with that strengthening outlook, cash generation is growing as is our plan for share repurchases, which we would target at approximately $num-one billion or $num-two billion more than we had originally planned.
from a volume standpoint, we are increasing our growth outlook for the full year to around num-one%, which includes just over a one point headwind from ongoing energy market challenges.
revenue for the quarter was up num-one% compared to last year, driven by a num-two% increase in volume, and a num-three% increase in average revenue per car, reflecting core pricing gains and higher fuel surcharge revenue.
automotive volume was up num-one% year-over-year, but down num-two% compared to the first quarter, driven by shortages for semiconductor-related parts.
turning now to premium, revenue for the quarter was up num-one% on a num-two% increase in volume.
these improvements were also driven by our continued focus on growing train linked, which has grown by num-one% since the second quarter year-five to just over num-two feet.
and lastly for premium, automotive sales are forecasted to increase from num-one million units in year-five to almost num-two million in year-six.
industrial chemicals and plastics shipments were up num-one% for both year-over-year and the first quarter comparison.