eps for the quarter was $num-one on a gaap basis and $num-two on a non-gaap adjusted earnings per share basis.
on [date], year-five, the board of directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $num-one per share payable on [date], year-five to shareholders of record as of the close of business on [date], year-five.
net premiums earned were up num-one% for the quarter, reflecting an increase in direct premiums earned offset by increased costs for reinsurance.
direct premiums written were up num-one% for the quarter, led by strong direct premium growth of num-two% in other states and num-three% in florida.
to be clear, the impact covid had during the first quarter on debt and equity markets affected our book value per share by approximately $num-one, made up of approximately $num-two related to the balance sheet-only impact from the decline in the amount of unrealized gains in our fixed income portfolio with the remainder being attributable to the effect of unrealized losses on our equity securities reflected in the p&l and consequently in retained earnings.
as of num-one, hurricanes matthew and florence, each were approaching single-digit open claims and are very near the end.
we entered this critical time in a position of strength with a debt-to-equity ratio of less than num-one%.
we are off to a good start in year-five with solid first quarter results, including an annualized return on average equity of num-one% and progress on our reinsurance renewals for [date].
in regards to capital deployment, during the first quarter, the company repurchased approximately num-one of uve shares at an aggregate cost of $num-two million.
we commenced business operations more than num-one years ago, intent on protecting and serving our consumers in their most critical time in some of the most challenging coastal areas in the united states for natural disasters.
as of today, the percentage complete is approaching num-one%, so we are well on our way.
this brings our booked ultimate to $num-one billion at num-two%.
total services revenue increased num-one% to $num-two million for the quarter, driven primarily by commission revenue earned on ceded premiums.
on the expense side, the combined ratio increased seven points for the quarter to num-one%, driven primarily by increased losses in connection with the continued diversification in the company's underlying business to states outside of florida, an increase in core loss pick for year-five, an increase in prior year adverse development, partially offset by a lower level of weather events in year-five and a small reduction in the expense ratio.
on our investment portfolio, net investment income decreased num-one% to $num-two million for the quarter, primarily due to significantly lower yields on cash and short-term investments during the first quarter of year-five when compared to the first quarter of year-four.
the credit rating on our fixed income securities was a plus at the end of the first quarter with a duration of num-one years, which we feel gives us a strong foundation to weather the current market conditions.