for year-six guidance, we expect a gaap and non-gaap adjusted earnings per share range of between $num-one and $num-two assuming no extraordinary weather events in year-six and a return on average equity of between num-three% to num-four%.
for the year, we generated earnings per share of $num-one on a gaap basis and a loss of $num-two on a non-gaap adjusted basis.
eps for the quarter was a loss of $num-one on a gaap basis and a loss of $num-two on a non-gaap adjusted basis.
we ended year-five with total revenue up num-one% to $num-two billion, driven primarily by growth in net premiums earned, realized gains on investments and increases in service revenue, partially offset by decreases in net investment income and increased reinsurance costs.
all told, we had a bit over num-one claims in the fourth quarter from named year-five storms and other pcs events.
our direct premiums written grew by num-one% in qtr-four compared to the prior year's quarter led by the impact of rate increases in florida and other states taking effect as well as strong direct premium growth in qtr-four of num-two% in states outside of florida.
for the full year, direct premiums written were up num-one% led by rate increases and increased volume as well as strong direct premium written growth of num-two% in other states and slightly improve policy retention.
we ended the year with a record of more than $num-one billion of premium now in force.
despite the weather in year-five, we continued our focus on underwriting increasing our primary rates in florida, close to num-one% for the full year, including num-two% in the num-txth quarter for year-five reinsurance costs as well as increases in some of our other states.
we continue to be backed by our great reinsurance program and partners with close to num-one% of our first event reinsurance capacity for [date], year-six secured already.
on the expense side, the combined ratio decreased num-one points for the quarter to num-two% but increased num-three points for the full year to num-four%.
in regards to capital deployment, during the fourth quarter, the company repurchased approximately num-one shares at an aggregate cost of $num-two million, for the full year, the company repurchased approximately num-three million shares at an aggregate cost of num-four million.
a benefit from our claims adjusting business and a num-one basis point improvement in the expense ratio, net investment income decreased num-two% for the quarter and num-three% for the full year primarily due to lower yields on cash and fixed income investments during year-five when compared to year-four.
the full year increases were driven primarily by an increase of num-one points for increased weather in year-five.
the increases were partially offset by a lower level of prior years reserve development on prior year's losses in lae reserves, which accounted for num-one loss ratio points.