third-quarter year-six adjusted net income attributable to valero stockholders was $num-one million or $num-two per share, compared to an adjusted net loss of $num-three million or $num-four per share for the third quarter of year-five.
for the third quarter of year-six, net income attributable to valero stockholders was $num-one million or $num-two per share, compared to a net loss of $num-three million or $num-four per share for the third quarter of year-five.
the refining segment reported $num-one million of operating income for the third quarter of year-six, compared to a $num-two million operating loss for the third quarter of year-five.
we redeemed the entire outstanding principal amount of our $num-one million floating-rate senior notes due in year-eight in the third quarter, and we ended the quarter well capitalized with $num-two billion of cash and $num-three billion of available liquidity, excluding cash.
refining throughput volumes in the third quarter of year-six averaged num-one million barrels per day, which was num-two barrels per day higher than the third quarter of year-five.
with respect to the renewable diesel segment, we expect sales volumes to average num-one million gallons per day in year-six.
third-quarter year-six adjusted operating income for the refining segment was $num-one million, compared to an adjusted operating loss of $num-two million for the third quarter of year-five.
operating expenses should average $num-one per gallon, which includes $num-two per gallon for noncash costs such as depreciation and amortization.
for modeling our fourth-quarter operations, we expect refining throughput volumes to fall within the following ranges: gulf coast at num-one million to num-two million barrels per day; mid-continent at num-three to num-four barrels per day; west coast at num-five to num-six barrels per day; and north atlantic at num-seven to num-three barrels per day.
our ethanol segment is expected to produce num-one million gallons per day in the fourth quarter.
we returned $num-one million to our stockholders in the third quarter of year-six through our dividend, resulting in a payout ratio of num-two% of adjusted net cash provided by operating activities for the quarter.
with the completion of this num-one million gallons-per-year plan, dgd's total annual capacity is expected to be num-two billion gallons of renewable diesel and num-three million gallons of renewable naphtha.
light product inventories are now at five-year lows and total light product demand is over num-one% of the year-four level.
across our system, current gasoline sales are at num-one% of the year-four level, and diesel sales are num-two% higher than in year-four.
refining cash operating expenses of $num-one per barrel were $num-two per barrel higher than the third quarter of year-five primarily due to higher natural gas prices.
for year-six, we still expect g&a expenses, excluding corporate depreciation, to be approximately $num-one million.