in terms of normalized ffo per share, we delivered $num-one in qtr-three year-five versus $num-two in the second quarter.
during the quarter, these asset classes have continued to perform well and led our third quarter performance, enabling us to deliver $num-one of normalized ffo per share.
third quarter year-five office occupancy for the same-store portfolio was num-one%, a sequential decline of num-two basis points due to several small tenants not reopening post covid.
you will note that the same-store cash noi declined num-one% year-on-year for the third quarter.
the same-store cash noi grew num-one% from the prior year normalizing for the paid parking shortfall and increased cleaning costs due to covid, same-store cash noi grew by num-two%.
average occupancy was num-one basis points lower sequentially with improving trends inter quarter while revpor declined num-two basis points and grew num-three basis points in our u.s. and canadian operating portfolios respectively.
in september leads and move-ins were num-one% and num-two%, respectively, as compared to the prior year.
our num-one assets sequential same-store pool comprising over num-two% of our shop noi, posted cash noi of num-three million which is effectively flat versus the second quarter.
third quarter revenue declined num-one% which was offset entirely by num-two%, lower operating expenses sequentially, primarily driven by lower covid related expenses.
two recent examples of the benefit of our diversified strategy include our investment in a $num-one billion class a trophy life science portfolio located in the premier south san francisco life science cluster at a forward cap rate of num-two% on cash noi.
the num-one communities within our sequential qtr-three same-store pool, including our lgm investment was num-two% occupied, which compares to an average of num-three% for the second quarter, outperform in the u.s. on an absolute and relative basis.
same-store cash noi on a sequential basis grew in canada by over num-one%.
however, we lapped a large $num-one million termination fee in the third quarter of year-four.
we provided additional information in our supplemental on page num-one.
the office portfolio continued to provide steady growth delivering num-one million of same-store cash noi in the third quarter.
while we are sober and clear eyed about the recent increase in covid cases nationally, to a record level of nearly num-one confirmed cases today, we believe in the strength of the senior living business as we look toward the post-pandemic environment.