our guidance range for normalized ffo for qtr-two is $num-one to $num-two per share.
normalized funds from operations in the first quarter was $num-one per share, a $num-two beat versus the high end of our prior guidance range of $num-three to $num-four.
second quarter net income is estimated to range from flat to $num-one per fully diluted share.
ventas reported first quarter net income of minus $num-one per share, driven by noncash charges in the quarter as we transferred assets to held for sale.
adjusted for these grants, qtr-one ffo per share was $num-one.
construction starts continued to decelerate in the first quarter to the lowest level since the first quarter of num-one, and were down num-two% from the peak in the fourth quarter of year-two.
core office grew num-one% year-on-year and num-two% sequentially.
the qtr-two ffo midpoint of $num-one is $num-two higher sequentially than the first quarter results due to an improving shop trajectory, after adjusting for hhs grants in both periods.
as a result, same-store shop noi declined sequentially by num-one% in the second quarter versus the first.
irf and ltac coverage improved num-one basis points to num-two times in the first quarter, buoyed by strong business results and government funding.
as previously communicated and included in our qtr-one guidance range, we received $num-one in hhs grants in shop in qtr-one.
since then, led by our u.s. shop community, which posted num-one basis points of growth, we grew shop spot occupancy num-two basis points through april num-txth to nearly num-three%.
all-in, the office portfolio delivered $num-one million of same-store cash noi in the first quarter.
as debbie noted, we are pleased with the improvement in leading indicators in occupancy as our move-in and move-out performance in march and april resulted in num-one and num-two net move-ins, respectively.
the num-txtlus population is expected to grow num-one% over the next five years, more than double the rate witnessed during the five-year recovery following the financial crisis.
the result is that mob occupancy stayed essentially flat, down only num-one basis points for the quarter, both sequentially and year-on-year.