we reported core ffo of $num-one per diluted share.
overall, same-store noi declined num-one% year-over-year on a gaap basis and num-two% on a cash basis, due to the same-store office noi decline of num-three% on a gaap basis and num-four% on a cash basis as well as bad debt expenses related to covid of approximately $num-five.
on a combined basis, we expect the impact of covid on noi and interest expense to translate to a negative impact of approximately $num-one per share relative to our initial guidance for year-five.
despite the stay-at-home orders, office leasing activity in northern virginia declined only num-one% in the second quarter compared to the five-year trailing quarterly average, according to cbre.
our current projection of set parking revenue will decline by over $num-one million over the remainder of the year.
based on our current projections, we have reduced year-five assumed capital expenditures for the year by approximately $num-one million compared to our initial year-five guidance.
as of [date], our net debt-to-ebitda ratio was num-one times, at the lower end of our targeted range.
with no office using sector losing more than num-one% of the total workforce during the second quarter, according to bls data.
overall, we have only deferred a small portion of rent and the expected cash noi impact is less than $num-one per share through year-end year-six.
excluding future bad debt, we expect the impact of covid in our office and other noi to translate to a negative impact of approximately $num-one per share relative to our initial core ffo guidance for year-five.
washington metro employment declined num-one% during the second quarter compared to over num-two% for the u.s. overall.
government contractor awards are up num-one% year-over-year due to the government's response to covid.
we collected num-one% of cash rents in june compared to num-two% per nmhc.
while the economic shutdown has impacted the original expected pace of leases, we averaged approximately num-one leases per month during the second quarter and expect to reach breakeven levels of occupancy by year-end, followed by steady quarterly noi growth thereafter.
included in this amount is almost $num-one million of lower assumed capital expenditures and $num-two million in less development spending as we no longer expect to break ground on the riverside development this year.
we believe our efforts to substantially derisk our portfolio by selling all single-tenant office assets and num-one% of our prior retail exposure, including all of the power centers, and reallocating that capital to our multifamily portfolio is certainly proving its value in these economic times.