total wwe revenue was $num-one million, a decline of num-two% due to the cancellation of live events, including a large scale international event and the associated loss of merchandise sales, all due to covid.
last quarter, wwe issued guidance for year-six adjusted oibda of $num-one million to $num-two million.
in the case of the nhl, linear ratings are down about num-one%.
on usa network, the following night raw delivered its best performance in the num-one to num-two demo in over a year and nxt's debut on its new night on tuesday was up num-three% in the num-one to num-two demo year-over-year.
accordingly, wwe estimates debt capacity under the revolving line of credit of $num-one million.
wwe sales and sponsorship revenue increased num-one%, excluding the loss of a large scale international event.
for year-six, we've estimated total capital expenditures of $num-one million to $num-two million to begin construction, as well as to enhance wwe's technology infrastructure.
looking at the wwe media segment, adjusted oibda was $num-one million, growing num-two% as increased revenue and profit from wwe's licensing agreement with peacock, as well as increased revenue from the escalation of domestic core content rights fees more than offset the absence of a large scale international event.
the nfl saw a media rights increase of num-one% even as linear ratings went down a little bit in recent season.
despite this decline, adjusted oibda grew num-one% to $num-two million, reflecting the upfront recognition related to wwe's licensing agreement and the decline in operating expenses that resulted from the absence of live events.
video views during wrestlemania week across digital and social platforms, including youtube, facebook and instagram, hit num-one billion and num-two million hours of content were consumed, representing a num-three% and num-four% increase, respectively.
from that time to the end of this quarter, raw ratings have held steady and smackdown ratings increased num-one%.
in the first quarter, wwe generated approximately $num-one million in free cash flow, which was down slightly.
digital consumption increased num-one% to num-two million hours.
wwe's flagship youtube channel crossed num-one million subscribers and is now the fourth most viewed youtube channel in the world.
as vince, nick and stephanie highlighted, transitioning wwe network to peacock, while launching wrestlemania with a live audience of num-one fans in attendance is a major accomplishment.