in our timberlands business, we expect third quarter earnings and adjusted ebitda will be approximately $num-one million lower than second quarter.
their collective efforts delivered the company's strongest quarterly adjusted ebitda on record at $num-one billion, surpassing last quarter's record by num-two%.
we ended the quarter with approximately $num-one billion of cash and just under $num-two billion of debt.
our year-to-date adjusted ebitda is almost $num-one billion higher than the first half of year-five.
we expect third quarter adjusted ebitda will be comparable to the third quarter year-five, but earnings will be approximately $num-one million higher than one year ago due to a lower average land basis on the mix of properties sold.
earnings and adjusted ebitda decreased by approximately num-one% compared with the first quarter due to timing of real estate sales and mix of properties sold, but were significantly higher than the year ago quarter.
in the third quarter, we will record a cash inflow of $num-one million and a gain of approximately $num-two million related to this transaction.
looking forward, key outlook items for the third quarter and full year year-six are presented on pages num-one and num-two.
as a result, we are increasing our guidance for full year year-six adjusted ebitda to $num-one million.
turning to real estate, energy and natural resources on pages nine and num-one.
we generated over $num-one billion of cash from operations in the second quarter and over $num-two billion year-to-date.
wood products earnings and adjusted ebitda improved by almost $num-one billion compared with the prior quarter.
wood products delivered another record quarter at $num-one billion of adjusted ebitda, surpassing last quarter's record by num-two%.
single-family starts in june reached their highest monthly level since may of num-one.
in distribution, adjusted ebitda increased $num-one million compared to the first quarter, a num-two% improvement as strong demand drove higher sales volumes for most products and the business captured improved margins.
i'll begin with our key financial items, which are summarized on page num-one.