this year, we expect to incur $num-one million to $num-two million in restructuring and realignment charges.
geographically, u.s. revenues declined num-one% as our businesses felt the impact of site shutdowns and project deployment delays.
our revenue in the quarter declined num-one% which was better than we anticipated coming out of the first quarter.
we expect revenue declines of num-one% to num-two% and operating margins in the range of num-three% to num-four%.
our teams quickly adapted and began to work in new ways with our customers, our suppliers and internally, enabling us to deliver earnings per share of $num-one, an achievement punctuated by commercial savvy, operational excellence, cost discipline and a focus on what really matters.
in total, we expect to realize approximately $num-one million in savings this year and an additional savings of approximately $num-two million in year-six.
segment revenue declined num-one% in the quarter and was significantly impacted by declines in the dewatering, industrial and construction rental business.
we ended the quarter with approximately $num-one billion in cash and total liquidity of roughly $num-two billion driven by the $num-three billion green bond offering we issued in june as well as strong cash flow performance in the quarter.
the decremental margins are impacted by continued softness in our high-margin dewatering and north american sensus water businesses, along with a tough prior year compared to last year's third quarter, where we had num-one% incremental margins on revenue growth.
europe was also a relative bright spot for us as revenues declined a modest num-one%.
today, we are up and running across our manufacturing network at greater than num-one% availability.
emerging markets were down num-one% driven largely by the lockdowns in the middle east and india.
geographically, both the united states and emerging markets revenue declined num-one%.
which combines metrology, communications and digital offerings, is expected to deliver revenues of roughly $num-one million over the course of the project.
backlog shippable in year-five is down num-one%.
measurement and control solutions orders declined num-one% in the quarter, and revenue declined num-two% as the metrology business slowed due to utility workforce availability and physical distancing requirements including restrictions on approaching or entering residents' homes.