Our reported third quarter earnings per share was $4.28 compared to $1.84 in the third quarter of 2020.
Our reported third quarter earnings per share was $4.28 compared to $1.84 in the third quarter of 2020.
For the full year, we now expect to deliver adjusted earnings per share of, at least, $11.50, and we expect the strong momentum to carry over into 2022.
As Greg mentioned in his remarks, taking into account our strong third quarter results and favorable market trends, we've increased our full year adjusted earnings per share from $8.50 to $11.50.
Adjusted earnings per share was $3.72 in the third quarter versus $2.47 in the prior year.
Results in Agribusiness were driven by strong execution and better than expected market environment.
For the full year, we now expect to deliver adjusted earnings per share of, at least, $11.50, and we expect the strong momentum to carry over into 2022.
As Greg mentioned in his remarks, taking into account our strong third quarter results and favorable market trends, we've increased our full year adjusted earnings per share from $8.50 to $11.50.
We also repurchased $100 million in shares and our Board authorized a new $500 million repurchase program, demonstrating our confidence in the business.
The $100 million of share repurchases in the quarter completed our $500 million authorization.
As Greg mentioned earlier, Bunge's Board has authorized a new $500 million program.
Looking ahead, we expect favorable market conditions to continue and we're confident in our ability to capture the upside from opportunities while minimizing the downside.
This innovation capability as well as our skill at solving supply chain issues have helped create a step change in many long-term customer collaborations and commitments.
In Agribusiness, results were expected to be up from our previous outlook and now forecasted to be higher than last year.
In non-core, full year results in the Sugar and Bioenergy joint venture are now expected to be up considerably from the prior year.
In Refined & Specialty Oils, results are expected to be up from our previous outlook and well above last year.
