And adjusted and GAAP earnings per share increased 58% and 12% over prior year to $0.60 and $0.46, respectively.
And adjusted and GAAP earnings per share increased 58% and 12% over prior year to $0.60 and $0.46, respectively.
And adjusted and GAAP earnings per share increased 58% and 12% over prior year to $0.60 and $0.46, respectively.
Sales for the quarter were $1.74 billion, which includes $752 million of PPE revenue.
First, our apparel business outperformed; second, the organization quickly pivoted to create a new PPE business; third, we generated positive cash flow; and fourth, we ended the quarter with $1.8 billion of liquidity.
We ended the quarter with $1.8 billion of liquidity, which we believe provides us ample capital to maximize our operating flexibility and positions us to grow the business going forward.
And we ended the quarter with approximately $1.8 billion of liquidity, which we believe provides us with significant cash capital cushion in this uncertain environment.
Restructuring and other related charges were approximately $63 million in the quarter.
Due to the uncertainty and unpredictability of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as the current lack of visibility in our business environment, we are not providing third quarter or full year 2020 guidance at this time.
Adjusting for sales from our PPE business, core U.S. Innerwear performed significantly better than our base case scenario.
Combined with a lower overall unit and sales volume, we believe it is reasonable to assume year-over-year pressure on margins in both this third and fourth quarters.
We expect to generate more than $150 million of additional PPE revenue in the second half of the year.
With respect to our PPE business, we currently expect more than a $150 million of PPE revenue in the second half, the vast majority of which is expected in the third quarter.
And in terms of cash flow, we continue to expect to generate positive cash flow in the second half of the year.
And we ended the quarter with approximately $1.8 billion of liquidity, which we believe provides us with significant cash capital cushion in this uncertain environment.
