Specifically, during our third quarter, we generated comparable basis EPS, excluding Canopy Growth of $3.16, an increase of 32% versus prior year, delivered strong operating margin and accelerating double-digit depletion growth for our beer business and increased operating cash flow and free cash flow by 14% and 23% respectively, resulting in ongoing debt repayment and achievement of target net leverage, excluding Canopy equity earnings as we ended the quarter at 3.3 times.
2, which will offer consumers the same great Corona taste and refreshment attributes while expanding to new flavors, including pineapple, strawberry, raspberry and passion fruit.
2 will be followed shortly thereafter by the introduction of another exciting new hard seltzer initiative.
In the near-term, we expect the remaining portfolio post the Gallo deal to generate fiscal 2021 net sales growth in the 2% to 4% range.
In addition, we expect the retained portfolio post divestitures to grow net sales in the 2% to 4% range this year.
We are also pleased that the board of directors recently authorized an additional $2 billion for share repurchases.
Due to the continued resiliency of our business and further clarity of the operating environment, we have issued fiscal 2021 earnings per share guidance and are projecting our comparable basis diluted earnings per share to range between $9.80 and $10.05.
Due to the continued resiliency of our business and further clarity of the operating environment, we have issued fiscal 2021 earnings per share guidance and are projecting our comparable basis diluted earnings per share to range between $9.80 and $10.05.
And while some depletion growth we saw this quarter included benefits from inventory restocking, the portfolio delivered accelerating underlying trends that align with our sales growth projection of 7% to 9% for the foreseeable future, as consumer demand remains exceptionally strong for our products across the majority of the portfolio.
Overall, our excellent year-to-date results provide confidence in our ability to achieve 7% to 9% net sales growth for fiscal 2021.
We expect net sales growth of 7% to 9%, which includes one to two points of pricing within our Mexican product portfolio.
Excluding the impact to Ballast Point, we expect organic net sales to land in the higher end of the 7% to 9% range.
Furthermore, we expect fiscal 2021 free cash flow to be in the range of $1.7 billion to $1.8 billion and operating cash flow to be in the range of $2.5 billion to $2.7 billion. We are projecting full-year fiscal 2021 capex spend to be in the range of $800 million to $900 million, which includes $650 million to $750 million of beer capex as we expect an acceleration of spend during Q4, driven by the 5 million hectoliter expansion at Obregon.
We now expect fiscal 2021 wine and spirits net sales and operating income to decline 9% to 11% and 16% to 18% respectively, which reflects the closing of the Gallo transaction, including Nobilo and the concentrate transaction, as well as the Paul Masson divestiture.
Even though margins for the segment took a step back during Q3, the underlying fundamentals of our consumer-led premiumization strategy continue to shine through as significant mix and price were generated during the quarter.
