Driven by the strength in operating income, first-quarter earnings per share grew 48% to $2.87.
Driven by the strength in operating income, first-quarter earnings per share grew 48% to $2.87.
We expect these headwinds on volume to normalize over the course of fiscal 2022.
We are maintaining our total company sales guidance of $49 billion to $51 billion, although we expect to perform at the upper end of the range.
Overall, we expect to grow our total company volumes by 2% to 3% in FY '22, outpacing protein consumption growth.
On capital alone, we're expected to invest $2 billion in fiscal year '22 with a disproportionate share focused on new capacity and automation objectives.
In support of our sales growth, we still expect a 2% to 3% volume growth on a year-over-year basis as we work to optimize our existing footprint and run our plants full.
In international/other, we expect margins of 2% to 3% as capacity expansions and strong global demand support volume growth and improved profitability.
Consistent with our expectation for a meaningful increase in capex spending to pursue a healthy pipeline of projects with strong return profiles, we anticipate capex spending of approximately $2 billion during fiscal 2022.
The program aims to deliver $1 billion in recurring productivity savings by the end of fiscal '24 relative to a fiscal 2021 cost baseline and has three critical focus areas, which are operational and functional excellence, digital solutions, and automation. As a result of projects like these, we're on track to deliver $300 million to $400 million of savings in fiscal 2022.
Declines in beef and prepared foods were largely due to continued labor challenges in those segments.
Key sales drivers for the segment included higher average sales price due to strong demand and increased hog costs, partially offset by a challenging labor environment.
Sales growth was driven by continued strong demand for beef products, which has supported higher average sales price.
About half of the decline was related to pet treats divestiture.
We expect these headwinds on volume to normalize over the course of fiscal 2022.
