Next, I'll provide a summary of our fourth quarter cash flows.
Next, I'll provide a summary of our fourth quarter cash flows.
Now of course, as we mentioned before, we've also achieved a structural benefit to unit costs as we deliver these new, larger, more efficient ships, coupled with the exit of 19 less efficient ships, it will help generate a 4% reduction in ship level unit cost going forward, enabling us to deliver more revenue to the bottom line.
And as we said we would, we maintain price despite the disruption, achieving 4% higher revenue per passenger cruise day in our fourth quarter than in the fourth quarter of 2019.
For the fourth quarter, occupancy was 58% across the ships in service and that was a 4 point improvement over the 54% we achieved last quarter during the peak summer season despite the slowdown in bookings just prior to the fourth quarter from the Delta variant.
Revenue per passenger cruise day for the fourth quarter 2021 increased 4% compared to a strong 2019 despite the current constraints on itinerary offering.
Simply, our monthly average cash burn rate of $510 million per month times 3.
Over the next few months, we expect ship level cash contributions to grow as more ships return to service and as we build on our occupancy percentage.
Our cumulative advance book position for the second half of 2022 and the first half of 2023 are at the higher end of historical ranges and at higher prices compared to 2019, with or without FCC's, but normalized for bundled packages.
Booking volumes for the same period during the fourth quarter of 2021 were higher than the third quarter.
While we expect the net loss for the first half of 2022, it makes me feel so good to say we expect the profit for the second half of 2022.
I am so happy to report that our cash from operations turned positive in the month of November, ahead of our previous indication, driven by increases in customer deposits and other working capital changes.
Given all these factors combined, we expect both monthly cash from operations and monthly EBITDA to consistently turn positive during the second quarter of fiscal 2022.
For the fourth quarter, occupancy was 58% across the ships in service and that was a 4 point improvement over the 54% we achieved last quarter during the peak summer season despite the slowdown in bookings just prior to the fourth quarter from the Delta variant.
However, we will pursue refinancings to extend maturities and reduce interest expense at the right time.
