On the bottom line, adjusted earnings per share was $2.46, down 12% compared to $2.81 in 2019.
Reported operating income was $134 million, a decrease of 18% and reported earnings per share for the fourth quarter was $2.26, down 20% compared to $2.82 a year ago.
Our store conversion rate grew 5% in the quarter.
The largest growth in our sales before the pandemic, both in percentage and absolute dollars, was driven by our product offerings focused on 10 -- 5 to 10-year-old children.
On Page 5, we've summarized some highlights of the fourth quarter.
Adjusted SG&A increased 5% to $327 million.
We're expecting all of our business segments will deliver growth in net sales with our consolidated net sales growing about 5%.
ECommerce comparable sales were strong, up 16% in the U.S. and up 47% in Canada.
On Page 16 we continued to innovate in our marketing in the fourth quarter and lean into emotionally driven digital experiences for families such as our virtual visits with Santa and virtual PJ parties with Leslie Odom Jr., the star of Hamilton.
Our border and tourist stores represent 10% of our U.S. stores that contributed over 20% of the decline in comparable sales.
Our store closure plan is expected to be accretive to earnings in 2021 and provide a $10 million cumulative earnings benefit by 2025.
Our suppliers were running on average 10 days late due to COVID-related challenges and precautions and transportation delays.
The largest growth in our sales before the pandemic, both in percentage and absolute dollars, was driven by our product offerings focused on 10 -- 5 to 10-year-old children.
Net sales in the quarter were $990 million, down 10% from the prior year.
Turning to Page 6 for a summary of net sales for the fourth quarter; reported net sales declined 10% to $990 million.
The effectiveness of our initiatives is most evident and looking at the difference in our performance between the first and second halves of the year, which we've summarized on Page 10.
Adjusted earnings per share is expected to grow about 10%, a bit less than what we are planning for operating income growth because of the higher interest costs from the senior notes we issued last year and an assumption of a higher tax rate with more of our income expected to be generated in the United States this year versus overseas.
We do expect first quarter profitability will increase significantly with operating income in the neighborhood of $30 million and adjusted earnings per share of approximately $0.25 compared to losses a year ago.
