Both are now available on the Investors section of our website, americanassetstrust.com.
I am pleased to report that we continue to make great progress on all fronts as we rebound from the impact of COVID-19.
We knew at the onset of the pandemic that we would not be impervious to its economic impact, but we were confident that the high-quality, irreplaceable properties and asset class diversity of our portfolio, combined with the strength of our balance sheet and ample liquidity would help us pull through and maybe even come out on the other side better off than at the beginning.
We continue to be optimistic as we meaningfully rebounded in 2021 and anticipate further growth in 2022 and beyond.
That's why we've aggregated the portfolio comprised of a well-balanced collection of office, retail, multifamily and mixed-use properties located in dynamic high barrier to entry markets, where we believe that the demographics, pent-up demand and local economies remain strong relative to others.
Our properties are more resilient in our view to economic downturns as they are in the path of growth, education, and innovation and importantly can likely withstand the impact of long-term inflation, perhaps even benefit from the benefits of long-term inflation.
Along those lines during the past quarter, we used our liquidity to acquire two complementary and accretive office properties in Bellevue, Washington, a market that we remain very bullish on and in which we expect continued rent growth.
Meanwhile, our development of La Jolla Commons III into an 11 story, approximately 210,000 square foot Class A office tower remains on time and on budget for Q2 or Q3 2023 delivery.
We are encouraged about the leasing prospects in the UTC submarket for high-quality, large blocks of space, where both tech and life science funding continues at record levels and same tenants continue to expand.
But we don't have specific news to share on that front at this time.
The same holds true for our One Beach Street development on the North Waterfront of San Francisco, which we believe to be a unique opportunity for a full building tenant with delivery expected in Q2 or Q3 of 2022.
Additionally, I'm happy to inform you that our Board of Directors has approved the quarterly dividend of $0.30 a share for the third quarter, which we believe is supported by our expectations for operations to continue trending positively.
It will be paid on December 23 to shareholders of record on December nine.
As we look at our portfolio, we are always reminded of the importance of owning and operating the preeminent properties in each of our markets.
That's why we focused on continuing to enhance our best-in-class community shopping centers to promote a better experience for our shoppers with the expectation that this will further strengthen our properties as the dominant centers in our submarkets.
And we understand the importance of modern state-of-the-art amenities in our office projects, which assist our tenants in the hiring and retention of talent in what is currently a very competitive job market.
We feel strongly that consistently improving and monetizing our properties, including incorporating sustainability and health and wellness elements is critical to remaining competitive in the marketplace in order to attract the highest quality and highest credit tenants.
Meanwhile, we are encouraged by our approximately 97% collection percentage in Q3, increased leasing activity across all asset classes, fewer tenant failures and bankruptcies than we expected and many modified leases hitting percentage rent thresholds sooner than expected and are collecting of approximately 96% of deferred rents due during the third quarter, all validating the strategies we implemented during COVID to support our struggling retailers through the government-mandated closures as we are fortunate to have the financial ability to do so.
Briefly on the retail front, we've seen an improved leasing environment over the past few quarters with positive activity engagement with new retailers for many of our vacancies, including recently signed new deals with Columbia Sportswear, Williams-Sonoma, Total Wine and First Hawaiian Bank to name a few, and renewals with Nordstrom's, Petco and Whole Earth among others as well as many other new deals and renewals in the lease documentation process.
Retailers are choosing our best-in-class locations to improve their sales, all the while we remain selective in terms of merchandising our shopping centers for the longer term.
Chris Sullivan and his team have done a tremendous job on that front despite some of the continuing headwinds at our Waikiki Beach Walk retail.
On the multifamily front as of quarter end, we were 96% leased at Hassalo in Portland, and 98% leased in San Diego multifamily portfolio.
All of the master lease units in San Diego that you've heard us discuss previously were absorbed by early August.
Though multifamily collections have been particularly challenging in Portland due to COVID-related government restrictions, we have started receiving meaningful checks from government rental assistant programs to drive down our outstanding amounts owed and expect more checks to come.
We are confident that Abigail's strong leadership at San Diego multifamily and Tania's new energy at Hassalo will drive improvements at our multifamily properties, both operationally and financially.
Last night we reported third quarter 2021 FFO per share of $0.57, and third quarter 2021 net income attributable to common stockholders per share of $0.17.
Third quarter results are primarily comprised of the following: actual FFO increased in the third quarter by approximately 11.4% on a FFO per share basis to $0.57 per FFO share compared to the second quarter of 2021, primarily from the following four items: first, the acquisitions of Eastgate Office Park in Corporate Campus East III in Bellevue, Washington, on July seven and September 10, respectively, added approximately $0.023 of FFO per share in Q3.
Second, Alamo Quarry in San Antonio added approximately $0.017 of FFO per share in Q3, resulting from 2019 and 2020 real estate tax refunds received during the third quarter of 2021, which reduced Alamo Quarry's real estate tax expense.
Third, decrease of bad debt expense at Carmel Mountain Plaza added approximately $0.005 per FFO share in Q3.
And fourth, the Embassy Suites and Waikiki Beach Walk added approximately $0.012 of FFO per share in Q3 due to the seasonality over the summer months.
Let me give you an update on our Waikiki Embassy Suites hotel.
Due to the impact of the delta variant, Hawaiian Governor Ige made a formal announcement on the third week in August that if you have plans or are thinking of coming to Hawaii, please don't come until we tell you otherwise.
It was not a mandate, but it did create a detrimental impact to our visitors to Hawaii and resulted in huge cancellation starting in August and into September.
Our results for Q3 at Embassy Suites hotel were expected to be much higher.
Overall, occupancy, ADR and RevPAR continued to increase on heading in the right direction.
As of October 19, Governor Ige made another formal announcement to begin welcoming all essential and nonessential travel, starting November 1, 2021.
We look forward to welcoming the fully vaccinated individuals and ramping up our visitor industry.
On our Q2 earnings call, I mentioned that Japan, who was then approximately 9% fully vaccinated, is now over 65% fully vaccinated and is expected to hit 80% by November.
All emergency measures in Japan were lifted on September 30 and lifted the intensive antivirus measures.
It marks the first time since April that Japan is free of corona virus declarations and intensive measures.
We expect to start seeing the Japanese tourists beginning to slowly start revisiting the Hawaiian Islands beginning in November, including Waikiki.
Now as we look at our consolidated statement of operations for the three months ended September 30, 2021, our total revenue increased approximately $6.5 million over Q2 '21, which is approximately a 7% increase.
Approximately 43% of that was from the two new office acquisitions.
Same-store cash NOI overall was strong at 14% year-over-year, with office consistently strong before, during and post-COVID and retail showing strong signs of recovery.
Multifamily was flat primarily year-over-year as a result of higher bad debt expense at our Hassalo on eight departments in Portland, but it was still approximately 5% higher than Q2 2021.
As previously disclosed, we acquired Corpus Campus East III on September 10, comprised of an approximately 161,000 square foot multi-tenant office campus located just off Interstate 405 and 520 freeway interchange, less than five minutes away from downtown Bellevue, Washington.
The four building campus is currently 86% leased to a diversified tenant base, which we saw as an opportunity when in-place rents were compared to what we were seeing in the marketplace.
The purchase price of approximately $84 million was paid with cash on the balance sheet.
The going-in cap rate was north of 3% as a result of the existing vacancy.
Our expectation based on our underwriting is that this asset will produce a five year average cap rate over 6% and a strong unlevered IRR of 7%.
Let's talk about liquidity.
At the end of the third quarter, we had liquidity of approximately $522 million, comprised of approximately $172 million in cash and cash equivalents and $350 million of availability on our line of credit.
Our leverage, which we measure in terms of net debt-to-EBITDA was 6.4 times.
Our focus is to maintain our net debt-to-EBITDA at 5.5 times or below.
Our interest coverage and fixed charge coverage ratio ended the quarter at 3.9 times.
As we approach year-end, we are providing our 2021 guidance.
The full year range of 2021 is $1.91 to $1.93 per FFO share with a midpoint of $1.92 per FFO share.
With that midpoint, we would expect Q4 2021 to be approximately $0.46 per FFO share.
The $0.11 estimated difference in Q4 FFO per share would be attributable to the following: approximately a negative $0.025 of FFO per share relating to nonrecurring collection of prior rents at one of our theaters in Q3 that will not occur in Q4 2021.
Secondly, our mixed-use properties are expected to be down approximately $0.037 of FFO per share relating to the normal seasonality of the Embassy Suites hotel and the related parking.
Third, Alamo Quarry is expected to be down approximately $0.02 of FFO per share relating to the nonrecurring property tax refund that was received in Q3 2021 for 2019 and 2020.
And we expect G&A and interest expense to increase and therefore, decrease FFO by approximately $0.02 per FFO share.
Additionally, we plan to issue 2022 full year guidance subject to Board approval when we announce year-end 2021 results in February of 2022.
Historically, we have issued our full year guidance on the Q3 earnings call.
We believe resetting the issuance and cadence of our guidance to the Q4 earnings call going forward is more in alignment with our peers and also gives us more clarity as to the following year guidance.
We will continue our best to be as transparent as possible and share with you our analysis, interpretations of our quarterly numbers.
Our office portfolio grew by approximately 440,000 square feet or nearly 13% in Q3 with the two new office acquisitions.
We brought up these assets on board at approximately 92% leased with approximately 20% rolling through 2022, which provides us with the opportunity to deliver start rates from approximately 10% to 30% over ending rents.
At the end of the third quarter at One Beach, which remains under redevelopment, our office portfolio is approximately 93% leased with 1.5% expiring through the end of 2021, approximately 9% expiring in 2022 with tour and proposed activity that has increased significantly.
Our office portfolio has weathered the storm well.
In the second and third quarters, we executed 57,000 annual square feet of comparable new and renewal leases with increases over prior rent of 9.2% and 14.5% on a cash and straight-line basis respectively.
New start rates for the 2021 rollover are estimated to be approximately 17% above the ending rates.
In fact, we are at least documentation for over half of the space rolling in 2021 as start rates nearly 28% over ending rates.
New start rates for the 2022 rollovers are estimated to be approximately 18% above the ending rates.
We are employing multiple initiatives to drive rent growth and occupancy, including renovating buildings with significant vacancy, adding or enhancing amenities, aggregating and white boxing larger loss of space where there is a scarcity of such blocks and improving our smaller spaces to be move-in ready.
By way of a few examples, we are just completing renovations of two buildings at Torrey Reserve in San Diego.
Those two buildings represent 80% of the total project vacancy.
We now have leases signed or in documentation for over half of that vacancy at premium rates.
We will be completing similar renovations Eastgate Office Park where leasing activity is already robust, but we anticipate taking this property to the next level of quality.
We are adding new fitness and conference facilities at Torrey Reserve, City Center Bellevue and Corporate Campus East III and will be further enhancing the employee's amenities building at Eastgate.
We believe that our continued strategic investments in our portfolio will position us to capture more than our fair share of that absorption at premium rents as the markets improve.
And we have more to look forward to with redevelopments and development.
In addition to One Beach Street and La Jolla Commons previously mentioned by Ernest, construction is nearly complete on the redevelopment of seven Tower Square in the, on our market at Portland, which will add another 32,000 rentable square feet to the office portfolio.
In summary, our office portfolio is on us as we move forward into the rest of 2021 and beyond.
