I'll start today with a review of guest cruise operations, along with a summary of our first quarter cash flows.
Then I'll provide an update on booking trends and finish up with adjusted EBITDA and net income expectations.
Turning to guest cruise operations.
During the first quarter 2022, we restarted 10 additional ships, resulting in 60% of our fleet capacity in guest cruise operations for the whole of the first quarter.
This was a substantial increase from 47% during the fourth quarter 2021.
As of today, 75% of our fleet capacity has resumed guest cruise operations.
Agility to continuously adapt to the ever changing landscape has been one of our greatest strengths during the pandemic.
In the first quarter, we continued to demonstrate this scale as we adjusted restart dates to optimize our guest cruise operations.
And we now expect each brand's full fleet to be back in guest cruise operations for its respective summer season where we historically generate the largest share of our operating income.
I am happy to report that just last week, we announced plans for our Australia restart, commencing at the end of May after the government advised that cruising would be permitted beginning in April.
For the first quarter, occupancy was 54% across the ships in service.
We never expected to achieve our historical 100-plus percent occupancies for the first quarter since many of these sailings were confirmed just a number of months before departure, which resulted in less than the normal booking lead time.
However, we had anticipated first quarter occupancy would exceed the 58% achieved in the fourth quarter of 2021.
We started the quarter with over 55% cabin occupancy booked for the first quarter and expected to improve upon that during the quarter.
However, during the first quarter 2022, as a result of the omicron variant, we experienced an impact on bookings for near-term sailings, including higher cancellations resulting from an increase in pretravel positive test results, challenges in the availability of timely pretravel tests and disruption than omicron caused on society during this time.
All of this inhibited our ability to build on our cabin occupancy book position for the first quarter 2022 during the first quarter, resulting in occupancy for the first quarter 2022 at 54% being lower than the 58% occupancy we achieved in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Despite all that, during the first quarter, we carried over one million guests, which was nearly a 20% increase from the fourth quarter 2021.
Once again, our brands executed extremely well with Net Promoter Scores continuing at elevated levels compared to pre-COVID scores.
Revenue per passenger day for the first quarter 2022 increased approximately 7.5% compared to a strong 2019 despite our lucrative world cruises and exotic voyages being shelved this year.
Our revenue management teams held on price when we experienced an impact on bookings for near-term sailings, optimizing our longer-term prospects for future revenue and pricing.
Once again, our onboard and other revenue per diems were up significantly in the first quarter 2022 versus the first quarter 2019, in part due to the bundled packages as well as onboard credits utilized by guests from cruises canceled during the pause.
We had great growth in onboard and other per diems on both sides of the Atlantic.
Increases in bar, casino, shops, spa and Internet led the way onboard.
Over the past 2.5 years, we have offered and our guests have chosen more and more bundled package options.
In the end, we will see the benefit of these bundled packages in onboard and other revenue.
As a result of these bundled packages, the line between passenger ticket and onboard revenue is blurred.
For accounting purposes, we allocate the total price paid by the guests between the two categories.
Therefore, the best way to judge our performance is by reference to our total cruise revenue metrics.
On the cost side, our adjusted cruise cost without fuel per available lower berth day, or ALBD as it is more commonly called, for the first quarter 2022 was up 25%.
I did say adjusted cruise costs and not net cruise costs, a term we had previously used.
The calculation of adjusted cruise costs and net cruise costs are the same.
The increase in adjusted cruise costs without fuel per ALBD is driven essentially by five things: first, the cost of a portion of the fleet being in pause status; second, restart related expenses; third, 15 ships being in dry dock during the quarter, which resulted in nearly double the number of dry dock days during the first quarter versus the first quarter 2019; fourth, the cost of maintaining enhanced health and safety protocols; and finally, inflation.
Remember, that because a portion of the fleet was in pause status during the first quarter and the higher number of dry dock days, we spread costs over less ALBDs.
This will again result in a doubling of the dry dock days during the quarter compared to 2019, which will impact adjusted cruise cost without fuel per ALBD during the second quarter.
We anticipate that many of these costs and expenses driving adjusted cruise costs without fuel per ALBD higher will end during 2022 and will not reoccur in 2023.
As a result of all of the above, we expect to see a significant improvement in adjusted cruise costs, excluding fuel per ALBD, from the first half of 2022 to the second half of 2022 with a low double-digit increase expected for the full year 2022 compared to 2019.
Next, I'll provide a summary of our first quarter cash flows.
We ended the first quarter 2022 with $7.2 billion in liquidity versus $9.4 million at the end of the fourth quarter.
Looking forward, we believe we remain well positioned given our liquidity.
The change in liquidity during the quarter was driven essentially by four things: first, an improved negative adjusted EBITDA of $1 billion due to our ongoing resumption of guest cruise operations despite the impact of the omicron variant.
We had thought adjusted EBITDA was going to improve more.
But as I said before, the omicron variant inhibited our ability to grow occupancy during the quarter, which limited the improvement in adjusted EBITDA.
Second, our investment of $400 million in capital expenditures net of export credits.
Third, $500 million of debt principal payments.
And fourth, $400 million of interest expense during the quarter.
Now let's look at booking trends.
Since the middle of January, we have seen an improving trend in booking volumes for future sailings.
Recent weekly booking volumes have been higher than at any point since the restart of guest cruise operations.
During the first quarter, we increased our booked occupancy position for the second half of 2022, albeit not at the same pace as a typical wave season due to the omicron variant.
As a result, the cumulative advanced book position for the second half of 2022 is at the lower end of the historical range.
However, we believe we are well situated with our current second half 2022 book position given the recent improvement in booking volumes, coupled with closer in booking patterns and our expectation for an extended wave season.
We continue to expect that occupancy will build throughout 2022 and return to historical levels in 2023.
And importantly, I am happy to report that prices on these bookings for the second half of 2022 continue to be higher with or without future cruise credits, or more commonly called FCCs, normalized for bundled packages as compared to 2019 sailings.
Our cumulative advanced book position for the first half of 2023 continues to be at the higher end of the historical range, also at higher prices with or without FCCs normalized for bundled packages as compared to 2019 sailings.
This is a great achievement given pricing on bookings for 2019 sailings is a tough comparison as that was a high watermark for historical yields.
I will finish up with our adjusted EBITDA and net income expectations.
We all know that booking trends are a leading indicator of the health of our business.
With improved recent booking trends leading the way, driving customer deposits higher, positive adjusted EBITDA is clearly within our sights.
Over the next few months, we expect ship level cash contribution to grow as more ships return to service and as we build on our occupancy percentages.
However, as I've already said, adjusted EBITDA over the first half of 2022 has been or will be impacted by the restart-related spending and dry dock expenses as 39 ships, over 40% of our fleet, will have been in dry dock during the first half of fiscal 2022.
Given all these factors combined, we expect monthly adjusted EBITDA to continue to improve and turn consistently positive at the beginning of our summer season.
We continue to expect a net loss for the second quarter of 2022 on both a U.S. GAAP and adjusted basis.
However, we expect the profit for the third quarter of 2022.
For the full year, we do expect a net loss.
Looking to brighter days ahead in 2023, with the full fleet back in service all year, 8% more capacity than 2019 and improved fleet profile with nearly a quarter of our capacity consisting of newly delivered ships, continuing momentum on our outstanding Net Promoter Scores and occupancy returning to historical levels, we are looking forward to providing memorable vacation experiences to nearly 14 million guests and generating potentially greater adjusted EBITDA than 2019.
