We hope you and your families are continuing to stay safe and well.
Now a few reminders before we go into the results.
These statements are based on management's current expectations, but may differ from actual results or outcomes.
In addition, we may refer to certain non-GAAP financial measures.
I'll start by covering our top line commentary, with highlights from each of our segments.
Kevin will then address our total company results as well as our FY '21 outlook.
Finally, Linda will offer her perspective, and we'll close with Q&A.
For the total company, Q2 sales increased 27%, with growth in every reportable segment.
It reflects about one point of net benefit from the July acquisition that gives us a majority share in our Saudi Arabia joint venture and unfavorable foreign currency exchange rates.
On an organic basis, Q2 sales grew 26%.
I will now go through our results by segment.
In our Health and Wellness segment, Q2 sales were up 42%, reflecting double digits increases in two of three businesses.
Our Cleaning business had double-digit sales growth behind strong ongoing demand across our portfolio.
Consumption remains high and, importantly, we're continuing to see increases in household penetration and repeat rates among existing and new users, driven by new routines developed from the prolonged pandemic as well as strategic brand investments.
While we expect tough comparisons as we lap these very high growth rates, we'll continue to work to retain the larger base of loyal consumers we've built for our cleaning and disinfecting products even after a critical mass of the population has been vaccinated.
We're continuing to make progress on our supply expansion, including a new line of wipes plant coming online this quarter.
We're also continuing to identify new sources of supply for other products experiencing constraints, including our disinfecting spray products.
As we're able to better meet consumer demand for our base products, we're looking forward to bringing back our Clorox compostable wipes, along with a stream of exciting innovation in the coming months.
Our Professional Products business had another quarter of double-digit sales growth behind continued high demand for our cleaning and disinfecting products.
It's worth noting, though, that while demand from businesses such as healthcare facilities has remained high, we've seen softer demand from businesses negatively impacted by ongoing mobility restrictions, like commercial cleaning and foodservice institutions.
That's why we're leaning into other out-of-home spaces through strategic alliances, and are encouraged by our progress.
While not yet a meaningful contributor in Q2, our out-of-home partnerships are expanding.
We're excited to announce a new multi-year deal with the NBA, an existing partner.
Lastly, within this segment, our sales in Vitamins, Minerals and Supplements business decreased in Q2.
This is a business where results have not been consistent, and we clearly have more work to do.
As you remember, we relaunched RenewLife last fall.
While we've seen improvements in all outlet consumption, it is not yet delivering the consistent results we want.
With more than half American consumers saying they intend to continue taking vitamins and supplements, we continue to believe in the attractiveness of this category.
Now turning to Household segment.
Quarterly sales were up 20%, with growth in all three businesses for a third consecutive quarter.
Grilling sales were up double digits, driven by continued strong consumption, which reflects the dramatic rise in in-home meal occasion as people continue to spend more time at home.
Behind our strategic collaboration with retailers, we've been able to grow household penetration for a third consecutive quarter, including among millennials and low-income consumers.
As we begin planning for the next growing season, we're building on our innovation through expanded distribution of our new Kingsford pellets and bringing new flavors to our Kingsford product lineup.
With consumer spending more on their backyard and growth, we feel optimistic about the future of this business.
Cat Litter sales were up by double digits in Q2, supported by innovation and continued strong performance online.
Our Fresh Step with Gain Original Scented Litter with the power of Febreze as well as our Fresh Step Clean Paws litter continued to perform very well, and we're supporting them through a new advertising campaign.
A record number of people have become pet parents since the onset of the pandemic in 2020, making this yet another example of how our diverse portfolio is particularly suited to the times.
Glad sales increased in Q2 behind strong demands across our portfolio of trash bags, wraps and food bags as people continue to spend more time at home.
Our latest innovation, Glad ForceFlex with Clorox trash bags, launched in September and is building distribution quickly, earning positive reviews.
In our Lifestyle segment, Q2 sales were up 9%, with double-digit growth in two of three businesses.
Brita sales were up by double digits for a fourth consecutive quarter behind continued strong shipments of pitchers as well as filters.
Just as with wipes and sprays, we're continuing to work through supply chain constraints in our Brita business, which has been impacting our shares.
We feel good about the long-term prospects of this business, especially since once people buy a Brita pitcher, they tend to stay in our franchise with continued purchases of filters.
Importantly, as household penetration for Brita keeps growing, we're building brand loyalty among these consumers.
The Food business had double-digit sales increase for a third straight quarter behind ongoing strong consumption of our Hidden Valley Ranch products, particularly dry seasonings and bottled dressings.
With more and more people eating at home during the pandemic, household penetration has grown to an all-time high, including above-average growth among millennials.
We're building on this momentum with a stream of innovation, including Hidden Valley Secret Sauces and, most recently, Hidden Valley plant-based ranch dressing, which is being supported by strong advertising investments.
Burt's Bees sales decreased by double digits as the business continued to be impacted by mobility restrictions as well as changes to consumer shopping and usage habits as a result of the pandemic.
This quarter, unseasonably warm weather also impacted lip balm sales.
Despite these challenges, we're making progress in the fast-growing online channel, where the brand had double-digit growth in Q2, and we remain confident in the long-term trajectory of this business.
Q2 sales grew 23%, driven by double-digit shipment growth in all major regions.
The growth reflects about nine points of benefit from the Saudi acquisition and about four points of unfavorable foreign currency headwinds.
Organic sales grew 18%.
The recent investment we made to create a dedicated international supply chain for Clorox disinfecting wipes is starting to pay off, giving us the ability to not only meet ongoing elevated demand in existing markets, but also to expand to new countries.
This is a strategic growth platform for the company, and we're supporting it through additional advertising investments.
We hope you and your families are well.
Our sales growth for the second quarter was broad-based, resulting in double-digit growth in each reporting segment for the first half of our fiscal year.
Additionally, this led to profitable growth for the first half, which enables us to capitalize on our momentum and continue investing behind our global portfolio to strengthen our competitive advantage.
Turning to our second quarter results.
Second quarter sales were up 27%, driven by 23 points of organic volume growth, three points of favorable price/mix and one point of net benefit from acquiring majority control of our Saudi joint venture, partially offset by FX headwinds.
On an organic basis, sales grew 26%.
Gross margin for the quarter increased 130 basis points to 45.4% compared to 44.1% in the year ago quarter.
Second quarter gross margin included the benefit of strong volume growth as well as 160 basis points of cost savings and 140 basis points of favorable price/mix.
These factors were partially offset by 420 basis points of higher manufacturing and logistics costs, which, similar to last quarter, included temporary COVID-19 spending.
Second quarter gross margin results also reflect about 50 basis points of negative impact from higher commodity costs, primarily from resin.
Selling and administrative expenses as a percentage of sales came in at 14.6% compared to 14.5% in the year ago quarter.
Advertising and sales promotion investment levels as a percentage of sales came in at about 10%, where spending for our U.S. retail business coming in at about 11% of sales.
This reflects higher investments across our portfolio, strengthening our value proposition to support higher levels of household penetration and lasting brand loyalty among new and existing consumers.
Our second quarter effective tax rate was 21%, which was equal to the year ago quarter.
Net of these factors, we delivered diluted net earnings per share of $2.03 versus $1.46 in the year ago quarter, an increase of 39%.
Turning to our updated fiscal year outlook.
We now anticipate fiscal year sales to grow between 10% to 13%, reflecting the strength of our first half results and higher expectations for the back half.
With our overall demand for our products remaining quite strong, we now expect back half sales to be about flat, on top of 19% growth in the year ago period.
We also anticipate about one point of contribution from our Saudi joint venture, offset by one point of foreign exchange headwinds.
On an organic sales basis, our outlook assumes 10% to 13% growth.
We now expect fiscal year gross margin to be down slightly, reflecting higher commodity and manufacturing and logistics costs as well as temporary costs related to COVID-19.
These factors are expected to be partially offset by higher sales.
As a reminder, we expect gross margin contraction over the balance of the fiscal year, primarily from two factors: first, we are lapping very strong operating leverage from robust shipment growth during the initial phase of the pandemic; and second, we're facing commodity headwinds this year versus last year's commodity tailwinds.
As a reminder, our gross margin expanded 250 basis points in the back half of fiscal year '20.
We continue to expect fiscal year selling and administrative expenses to be about 14% of sales, reflecting ongoing aggressive investments and long-term profitable growth initiatives and incentive compensation costs, consistent with our pay-for-performance philosophy.
Additionally, we continue to anticipate fiscal year advertising spending to be about 11% of sales.
We spent about 10% in the front half of the year and continue to anticipate about 12% in the back half in support of our robust innovation program.
We continue to expect our fiscal year tax rate to be between 21% to 22%.
Net of these factors, we now expect fiscal year '21 diluted earnings per share to increase between $8.05 and $8.25 or 9% to 12% growth, reflecting strong top line performance, partially offset by a rising cost environment.
We now anticipate fiscal year diluted earnings per share outlook to include a contribution of $0.45 to $0.50 from our increased stake in our Saudi Arabia joint venture, primarily driven by a onetime noncash gain.
I'm pleased we've raised our fiscal year '21 outlook.
Of course, it's important to note, we continue to operate in a highly dynamic environment and are monitoring headwinds that could result in impacts moving forward.
In closing, I'm also pleased with our broad-based strong results in the first half, which enables us to continue investing in our brands, capabilities and new growth opportunities, all in support of our ambition to accelerate long-term profitable growth for our shareholders.
I hope you and your families are well.
It's great to be here today showing Clorox's results for the first half of our fiscal year.
My messages this quarter largely reinforce what we discussed in Q1, with the most important point being that our global portfolio of leading brands continues to play a critical role in people's everyday lives.
My first message is that our first half results are rooted in purpose-driven growth.
Our purpose as a company is to champion people to be well and thrive every single day.
And our portfolio of leading brands is the bedrock of our ability to deliver on that promise.
Our first half results reinforce the important role our brands play in addressing people's everyday needs.
We continue to see broad-based strength in our portfolio, with double-digit sales growth for most of our businesses.
Clorox disinfecting products continue to be in high demand among consumers, businesses and healthcare settings.
And as people spend more time at home, we're continuing to see strong performance in other parts of our portfolio.
Kingsford is a great example.
As Lisah mentioned, our Grilling business delivered double-digit sales growth in the quarter.
And with a recharge strategy emphasizing innovation, I'm optimistic about the long-term prospects of this business.
They understand that, more than ever, people and communities need us.
I'm so grateful for their passion and commitment.
My second message is that Clorox will stay in the driver seat, continuing our posture of 100% offense to make the most of the opportunities in front of us while navigating an ongoing dynamic environment.
There's no question, Clorox has built significant momentum over the last year, and we have every intention of extending that longer term.
Our brand portfolio is especially relevant for this environment and for the consumer trends I mentioned last quarter, which we expect to persist beyond the pandemic, prioritizing hygiene and health and wellness, caring for pets and accelerating digital behaviors related to practically every aspect of their lives.
More than ever, as home is where the heart is, it's also where consumers are directing their investments with spending across many categories to support quality of in-home experiences.
This certainly bodes well for our portfolio.
We continue to see strong levels of household penetration.
Importantly, what we mentioned last quarter about repeat rates across our portfolio is playing out.
We're accelerating purchase frequency.
And repeat users are the source of most of our sales growth across our portfolio.
In addition, our strategic investments are creating a virtuous cycle around engaging and retaining new and existing users, resulting in a consumer retention rate of nearly 90%.
As I mentioned, 100% offense will help us extend this momentum, which, as a reminder, includes: investing more across our portfolio to retain the millions of people buying our brands; expanding our public health support to more out-of-home spaces; increasing capital spending for immediate and future production capacity, including wipes expansion in international; and partnering with our retailers to grow our categories.
Given the dynamic environment we continue to face, 100% offense also means actively planning for challenges and disruptions in the near and long term, including an inflationary cost environment, elevated competition in light of category tailwinds and accelerating advancements in digital technology that we expect to impact all areas of our business.
What's important is we'll continue to make strategic choices that position us to achieve our ambition to accelerate long-term profitable growth.
And finally, my third message is this.
As we continue to address immediate priorities related to unprecedented demand, we're also accelerating our progress against our strategy to deliver long-term shareholder value.
Our IGNITE Strategy continues to put people at the center of everything we do and helps us make the most of our strategic advantage in the near and long term.
Addressing unprecedented consumer demand for much of our portfolio continues to be an immediate priority.
We continue to make progress on a number of businesses.
We're bringing in more third-party supply sources and launching our new wipes line in our Atlanta facility in the third quarter.
Importantly, simplification is our mantra, and we're seeing the benefit of focusing on fewer SKUs, which we expect to continue beyond the pandemic.
As I mentioned earlier, we're growing Clorox Disinfecting Wipes international, supported by a dedicated supply chain.
Our expansion plans are going very well, and we expect to double the number of countries where Clorox wipes are sold.
Another immediate priority is to continue supporting people's safety when they're outside their homes through strategic alliances to support public health.
We're expanding our programs with Uber Technologies and Enterprise Holdings.
We recently established a multi-year deal with the NBA and look forward to pursuing similar opportunities with other organizations.
And as the pandemic continues to take a toll in the economy, we know that far too many people feel financial pressure from unemployment and less discretionary spending.
We're mindful of the role we can play to support those who are particularly value-sensitive, and we'll continue to deliver superior value through meaningful innovation.
Importantly, we're also making progress in laying the foundation for long-term growth.
We will continue to invest strongly in our global portfolio of leading brands, particularly behind robust innovation that differentiates our products and deliver superior value.
We will continue to reimagine how we work to ensure a strong culture, with a highly engaged team that works simpler and faster on strategic priorities.
I'm proud of how we've been operating during the pandemic, including accelerating our speed to market.
And finally, as we've said before, we view ESG as a contributor to competitive advantage, which is why it's embedded in our business.
Achievements this quarter include: being included in the 2021 Bloomberg Gender-Equality Index; achieving 100% renewable electricity in the U.S. and Canada four years early; signing on to the Energy Buyer Federal Clean Energy Policy statement, which calls for a 100% clean energy power sector; and donating $1 million to Cleveland Clinic to establish the Clorox public health research grant in support of science-based public health research.
We are grateful to play a role in supporting people and communities as we continue to navigate the global pandemic.
It only strengthens our resolve in pursuing purpose-driven growth, ensuring a strategic link between our impact on the world and long-term value creation for our shareholders.
