I'm pleased to report another very strong quarter with record revenues at CooperVision and CooperSurgical, driving record earnings and robust free cash flow.
CooperVision's growth was broad-based and led by our daily silicone hydrogel portfolio of lenses and a solid rebound in EMEA.
While our myopia management products also performed really well, and of course, we received the exciting news about regulatory approvals for MiSight in China.
CooperSurgical continued posting great results led by fertility and a nice bump in PARAGARD, helped by buying activity from a price increase.
Moving forward, we expect core operational strength to continue driving strong performance even with challenges from COVID and currency.
With this expectation and the opportunities we're seeing in myopia management, daily silicones, and fertility, we've increased our constant currency revenue guidance for both CooperVision and CooperSurgical and we'll maintain our investment activity to capitalize on the potential for incremental share gains as we move toward fiscal 2022.
Moving to third-quarter results and reporting all percentages on a constant currency basis, Consolidated revenues were $763 million, with CooperVision at $558 million, up 20%, and CooperSurgical at $206 million, up 58%.
Non-GAAP earnings per share were $3.41.
For CooperVision, our daily silicone hydrogel portfolio led the way with all 3 regions posting strong growth.
Particular strength was noted in our daily toric franchises, but daily spheres and multifocals also performed well.
And in a great sign, we've seen a nice uptick in fit data for MyDay and clariti, which bodes well for share gains and future growth.
Within the regions, the Americas grew 16%, led by MyDay and clariti and continued improvement in patient flow.
EMEA grew a healthy 24% as consumer activity returned in the region, and we took share.
1 in EMEA, and we're seeing the benefits of increasing patient flow, So, we'll continue investing to support the reopening activity happening in many of the European markets.
Asia Pac grew 18%, led by a slow but steady improvement in consumer activity.
For us, a significant portion of Asia Pac is driven by Japan.
And although consumer activity remains somewhat muted, we're performing well and taking share, and we're well-positioned to capitalize on future opportunities given our recent product launches.
Moving to category details.
Silicone hydrogel dailies grew 31% and with MyDay and clariti both performing well.
MyDay, in particular, continues taking share, led by strength in MyDay toric in all regions.
For our FRP portfolio, Biofinity continued its solid performance led by Biofinity Energys and Biofinity toric multifocal.
Regarding product expansions and launches, we remain very active.
We're finishing the launch of clariti, sphere, and the MyDay second base curve sphere in Japan.
We're rolling out Biofinity toric multifocal in additional markets.
We're rolling out an expanded toric range for MyDay, giving it the broadest range of any daily toric in the world.
And we're also completing the rollout of extended toric ranges for clariti and Biofinity.
We've also started prelaunching activity for MyDay multifocal with the launch -- with a full launch on target for the U.S. and other select markets in November.
Feedback on this lens remains extremely positive, including from fitters commenting that our OptiExpert fitting app has the highest fit success rate of any multifocal on the market.
Recent data shows that over 90% of contact lens wearers over the age of 40 expect to continue wearing lenses with the biggest challenge being finding a good multifocal.
Given the feedback we've been receiving, we believe MyDay will be the best multifocal on the market and combined with the fact that it's joining an already highly successful MyDay sphere and toric, we're very optimistic about its success.
Moving to myopia management.
Our portfolio grew a robust 90% this quarter to $18 million, with MiSight up 187% to $5 million and ortho-k products up 68%.
As a global leader in the myopia management space, our portfolio is the broadest in the industry, comprised of MiSight, the only FDA-approved myopia control product, our broad range of market-leading ortho-k lenses, and our innovative SightGlass Vision glasses.
We continue targeting $65 million in myopia management sales this year, including MiSight reaching $20 million.
Regarding MiSight, there was a lot of positive activity this quarter as we continue capitalizing on our first-mover advantage.
We received regulatory approval in China, and we're extremely excited about that opportunity.
The approval requires lenses to be manufactured post-approval.
So, we've quickly initiated production and packaging, and plan to seed the market starting in early fiscal Q1 with a full launch in fiscal Q2 of next year.
As part of this, we're immediately ramping up marketing efforts and working quickly to ensure the product is positioned for success.
Myopia rates are very high in China, So, the market potential is significant.
As an example, it's estimated that over 80% of high school kids are myopic, So, treating children at a younger age is of high importance in the country.
Outside of China, we continue making great progress with our large retailers and buying groups.
Our pilot programs are live and expanding, and we've finally been able to resume in-person training in many markets, including in the U.S.
We now have over 40,000 children wearing MiSight worldwide, and that number is growing quickly.
Additionally, the average age of a new MiSight wearer remains 11, So, this treatment is bringing children into contact lenses at a much younger age.
Lastly, on MiSight, we did see momentum pick up even more in August, including here in the U.S., So, we're bullish for a strong Q4.
Regarding our other myopia management products, we had a solid quarter for ortho-k driven by our broad product portfolio and from the halo effect we're seeing with MiSight.
And we continue making progress with our SightGlass myopia management glasses, preparing for several upcoming launches later this calendar year.
We've also submitted our application to the FDA for approval for MiSight as a myopia management treatment and expect to receive initial feedback within a couple of months.
In the meantime, as the myopia management market continues developing, we're definitely seeing the value of offering multiple options to eye care professionals, So, we look forward to expanding our offerings and availability.
To wrap up on myopia management, our innovation pipeline is very healthy with eight focused pipeline products.
Our sales and marketing efforts are proving successful and our focus on leading with clinical data and providing the best and broadest portfolio in the market, has us in an excellent position for continued success.
To conclude on vision, our business is doing really well.
The back-to-school season is healthy, new fits are doing well, and we're excited about our existing products and upcoming launches.
On a longer-term basis, the macro growth trends remained solid, with roughly 33% of the world being myopic today, and that number is expected to increase to 50% by 2050.
Given our robust product portfolio, new product launches, myopia management momentum, and strong fit data, we're in great shape for long-term sustainable growth.
This was an outstanding quarter with record revenues of $206 million.
Fertility, in particular, continued to perform exceptionally well, growing 72% year over year to $83 million.
Strike was seen around the world and throughout the product portfolio, including from consumables, capital equipment, and genetic testing.
Some areas of strength included growth in media, for pets, needles, incubators, and embryo transfer catheters, along with another very strong quarter from RI Witness, our proprietary automated lab-based management system that clinics implement to maximize safety and security by optimizing their lab practices.
We're also benefiting from increased utilization of our artificial intelligence-based genetic testing platform, which increases the doctor's ability to select the best embryos for transfer.
Similar to last quarter, we're continuing to see COVID impact the market, but share gains and improving patient flow in most countries are driving our results.
Regarding the broader fertility market, the global landscape remains fragmented with significant geographic diversity.
And with an addressable market opportunity of well over $1 billion and mid- to upper-single-digit growth, this is a great market for us.
It's estimated that one in eight couples in the U.S. has trouble getting pregnant due to a variety of factors, including increasing maternal age.
And that more than 100 million individuals worldwide suffer from infertility.
Given the improving access to fertility treatments, increasing patient awareness, greater comfort discussing IVF and increasing global disposable income, this industry should grow nicely for many years to come.
So, overall, in fertility, our portfolio and market positioning are excellent.
We remain in a great spot for future share gains with improving traction in key accounts.
We're seeing continued reopening activity around the world, and the industry has great long-term macro growth drivers.
For all these reasons, we remain very bullish on this part of our business.
Within our office and surgical unit, we grew 50% with PARAGARD up 51% and office and surgical medical devices up 49%.
For PARAGARD, we implemented a roughly 6% price increase toward the end of the quarter, which resulted in a buy-in of roughly $4 million.
This will impact our Q4 performance, but the price increases are long-term positive noting with contracts and reimbursement timing, the price increase rolls in over the next couple of years.
Within medical devices, several products performed well, including EndoSee Advance, our direct visualization system, for evaluation of the endometrium and our portfolio of uterine manipulators.
To wrap up on CooperSurgical, this was another excellent quarter, and it was great to exceed $200 million in sales for the first time ever.
Similar to CooperVision, we have powerful macro trends supporting our underlying growth and remain confident in our ability to continue delivering strong results.
Third-quarter consolidated revenues increased 32% year over year or 28% in constant currency to $763 million.
Consolidated gross margin increased year over year to 68.3%, up from 66.3% with CooperVision posting higher margins driven by product mix and currency, and CooperSurgical posting higher margins from product mix tied to the significant year-over-year growth in fertility and PARAGARD.
Opex grew 28% as sales increased with a rebound in revenues, along with higher sales and marketing expenses associated with investments in areas such as myopia management.
Consolidated operating margins were strong at 26.6%, up from 23.2% last year.
Interest expense was $5.6 million and the effective tax rate was 13.5%.
Non-GAAP earnings per share was $3.41 with roughly 49.8 million average shares outstanding.
Free cash flow was very strong at $180 million, comprised of $224 million of operating cash flow, offset by $44 million of capex.
Net debt decreased to $1.5 billion and our adjusted leverage ratio improved to one and a half times.
Overall, this was a very strong quarter, and we exceeded our financial performance expectations.
We continue monitoring and evaluating the scope, duration, and impact of COVID-19 and its variants.
And while this remains a risk factor, our visibility is sufficient to provide the following update to our guidance.
For the full fiscal year, we're increasing our constant currency guidance for both CooperVision and CooperSurgical and maintaining our non-GAAP earnings per share guidance.
Specific to Q4, consolidated revenues are expected to range from $730 million to $760 million, up 7% to 11% in constant currency, with CooperVision revenues between $540 million and $560 million up 6% to 10% in constant currency, and CooperSurgical revenues between $190 million and $200 million, up 8.5% to 14% in constant currency.
Non-GAAP earnings per share is expected to range from $3.24 to $3.44.
To provide color on this guidance, currency moves since last quarter have reduced the benefit of the full-year FX tailwind from 3% to 2.5% for revenues, and 7% to 5% for EPS.
With respect to Q4, this equates to reducing revenues by $10 million in CooperVision and $2 million at CooperSurgical, and reducing earnings per share by $0.14.
CooperVision is offsetting some of the impact with expected strength in daily silicone and myopia management sales, while CooperSurgical is expecting continued strength, although incorporating the Q3 PARAGARD buy-in of $4 million and hopefully some conservatism regarding COVID's impact on elective procedures.
Consolidated gross margins for the fiscal year are expected to be around 68%, with fiscal Q4 gross margins expected to be around 67.5%, driven primarily by currency.
Operating expenses are expected to be slightly lower sequentially, but similar to fiscal Q3 on a percentage of sales basis, as we continue investing in multiple areas such as myopia management and fertility.
Our Q4 tax rate is expected to be around 11%.
And lastly, our free cash flow continues to improve, and we're now expecting roughly $550 million for the full year.
