Let me start by providing some key takeaways.
First, we continue taking share in the global contact lens market, with CooperVision being flat for calendar Q3 against the market being down 3%.
We're having success with our strong daily silicone hydrogel portfolio, with unique products like Biofinity Energys, and with several product launches.
Second, CooperSurgical outperformed with fertility, PARAGARD, and medical devices all exceeding expectations.
In particular, we're taking share in the fertility market, where we're seeing strong momentum.
Third, our myopia management portfolio comprised of MiSight and Ortho K lenses performed extremely well, including MiSight being up 73%.
So we're taking share, launching products, and investing intelligently, including helping expand the pediatric optometry marketplace.
Our teams are executing at a very high level, and we expect that to continue.
Moving to the numbers and reporting all percentages on a constant-currency basis, we posted consolidated revenues of $682 million in Q4, with CooperVision revenues of $506 million, down 3%; and CooperSurgical revenues of $175 million, down 4%.
Non-GAAP earnings per share were $3.16.
For CooperVision, the Americas were up 3%, led by strength in MyDay and Biofinity and some rebound in channel inventory of roughly $10 million.
EMEA was down 6%, which included quarter-end purchasing delays from several large accounts as the region returned to more restrictive COVID-related lockdowns in October.
Asia Pac was down 8% with COVID-related softness lingering longer into the quarter than we were expecting.
To add a little more color on Asia Pac, we're well-positioned in that region and taking share, but the market has been sluggish.
We are becoming more optimistic, though, as we saw a pickup in October and November, driven by strong MyDay sales.
Overall, for the full quarter, revenues came in roughly where we expected with COVID continuing to present challenges, but we're managing through it and taking share by executing on product launches and expanding our key account relationships.
Moving to some additional quarterly numbers.
Our silicone hydrogel dailies were up 1% in Q4, led by strength in torics and a strong rebound in MyDay sphere sales.
We're seeing daily silicones as the clear winner right now as health and wellness trends continue to drive adoption, and this bodes well for us given our strong portfolio.
Additionally, we're now fully unconstrained on MyDay, so we're able to aggressively launch the product around the world, especially the toric, which is still relatively early in its launch stage.
Biofinity and Avaira combined to be flat for the quarter, with strength noted in Biofinity toric and Energys.
Energys continues to be a strong performer, growing double digits.
It was launched a few years ago, probably a little ahead of its time.
But its innovative lens design that uses digital zone optics to help alleviate eye fatigue from excessive screen time is certainly catching on now as it's addressing an important need in today's digital world.
Moving to our product launches.
We remain incredibly busy with MyDay sphere and toric being launched or relaunched in many markets around the world.
Biofinity toric multifocal and clariti's extended daily toric range continuing their successful launches and the launch of MiSight.
One point to highlight is how incredibly active we are in the daily silicone hydrogel space right now, probably busier launching products than anyone, and we expect this to continue throughout 2021.
Given there still exists roughly $2.4 billion in traditional daily hydrogel sales worldwide, there's a significant multiyear trade-up opportunity for us and our industry.
The only FDA-approved myopia management contact lens clinically proven to slow the progression of myopia in children.
Things are going incredibly well.
We now have roughly 25,000 kids around the world wearing MiSight, including over 1,000 in the U.S., and the momentum when new fits is strong.
But we already have 2,100 optometrists certified to fit the lens and 1,400 more in the process of being certified.
We've also recently launched in Taiwan and Russia, and the early feedback is very positive.
launch, including the average age for a new MiSight wearer is 11 years old.
Getting fits in this age range is fantastic as the average age for fitting a new wearer in regular contact lenses is 17, which means we're getting an extra six years' worth of revenue.
Furthermore, 70% of kids being fit in MiSight are 12 and under.
So we're changing the overall perception of what age kids can be fit in contact lenses.
Regarding sales, even with continuing COVID challenges, our myopia management portfolio, including MiSight and Ortho K lenses, grew 39% to $13 million.
Within these results, MiSight grew 73% to $2.5 million and Ortho K grew 33%, which included $1.3 million of revenue from last quarter's acquisition of GP Specialties.
For this coming year, even with COVID impacting the market, we're continuing to target $25 million in global MiSight sales, which is growth of roughly 250%.
We're also targeting strong growth in our Ortho K franchise, driven by positive developments such as the recent receipt of European CE mark approval for our Paragon lenses.
When looking at the global myopia management market, we're at the forefront of an extremely exciting pediatric optometry category.
Myopia management is in its infancy.
But as we discussed last quarter, there's a clear path to a market that we expect will ultimately be well over $5 billion annually for manufacturers.
We still have a lot of work to do, and we're investing in sales and marketing programs, new launches, regulatory approvals, and R&D activities to really help drive the market forward.
This approach is clearly working, and it's great to keep hearing optometrists talk about MiSight as standard of care for their pediatric patients.
As trained professionals, optometrists know that reducing the progression of myopia brings many benefits, including reducing the risk of serious eye disease later in life, such as retinal detachment, cataracts, and glaucoma.
To conclude our vision, let me touch on the global contact lens market.
We're seeing optometry offices mostly open around the world, and we're frequently hearing that they're fully booked with appointments running through January.
Having said that, patient throughput remains below pre-COVID levels as offices work to get more efficient with COVID safety protocols and managing staffing challenges.
From a consumption perspective, wearers are returning to their normal wearing and ordering habits.
But new fits are running roughly 90% of pre-COVID levels on a global basis, and that's the challenge.
and in markets like China, and it's improving everywhere, but eye care professionals are still struggling to meet demand.
We're not seeing any signs that demand is disappearing, though, so we believe it's only a matter of time before new fit activity returns to pre-COVID levels and the pent-up demand is addressed.
On a longer-term basis, the underlying growth drivers for our industry remains strong and may actually be improving with the macro trend of people spending more time on electronic devices.
With roughly one-third of the world myopic, and this is expected to increase to 50% by 2050, combined with a continuing shift to daily silicone hydrogel lenses, geographic expansion, and strong growth in torics and multifocals, our industry has a very bright future.
And for CooperVision, our strong product portfolio, momentum within the myopia management space, and strong new fit data puts us in a great position for long-term sustainable growth.
Revenues rebounded faster than expected to $175 million for the quarter.
Although down 4%, we exceeded expectations in a challenging market environment and expect solid performance moving forward.
Starting with our fertility business.
Revenues rebounded nicely and were only down 2% year over year.
We're taking market share, and we're well-positioned for future gains with a strong product portfolio and improved traction with key accounts.
Within products, our consumable portfolio grew this quarter, led by our RI Witness system.
This is an RFID lab-based management system that helps fertility clinics automate their processes by identifying, tracking, and recording patient samples throughout the IVF process.
Labs are starting to use it as a cornerstone solution to improve safety, reduce errors, improve workflow management, and enhanced compliance of standard operating procedures.
The product almost doubled in revenue to $2.5 million and with a growing focus on safety and compliance within fertility clinics, we expect this product to continue growing nicely.
Our genomics business also returned to growth this quarter as testing volume picked up, and our media products also grew.
The only softness we saw was in capital equipment, which declined against a very tough comp from last year.
From a fertility market perspective, we're still seeing COVID negatively impact patient flow and some important countries like India still have clinics shut down or are operating with minimal patient volume.
But the good news is we're seeing patient flow improving, and we believe we'll see IVF cycles return to normal soon.
With this happening, we'll continue expanding our business through in-person and virtual sales and marketing activity, adding sales personnel, and expanding our product offerings.
The fertility market has extremely positive long-term macro growth trends.
And as the global leader in the space, we're intent on helping the industry return to its strong historical growth rates.
Within our office and surgical unit, we were down 5%, slightly better than forecasted.
PARAGARD continued to rebound, down 6% to $50 million against a tough comp from last year due to buy-in activity before price increase.
PARAGARD is another product that is benefiting from the positive wellness trends we're seeing in the U.S. as the only 100% hormone-free IUD on the U.S. market, it offers a fantastic long-lasting birth control option that addresses the needs and interests of women looking for a healthy alternative.
Sales of the product continued trending in the right direction through November, so we're optimistic we'll see PARAGARD grow year over year in Q1.
Elsewhere, like many medical device companies, we've seen deferred elective procedures steadily rescheduled, and our medical device sales have improved.
We're entering this year in a really nice position with some of our focus products such as INSORB, our patented surgical skin closure device, and EndoSee Advance, our direct visualization system for evaluation of the endometrium positioned to grow nicely as markets rebound.
In conclusion, let me say I'm optimistic about the future.
Our businesses are performing well, and we're taking share.
We're very active with new product launches, and we have fantastic dedicated people driving our businesses forward.
Our fourth-quarter consolidated revenues decreased 1% as reported or 3% in constant currency to $682 million.
Consolidated gross margin increased 70 basis points year over year to 67.7%.
This was driven primarily by currency at CooperVision and efficiency improvements at CooperSurgical, from our successful global manufacturing integration and consolidation efforts.
This quarter was an extremely busy one for our manufacturing teams as we work diligently to finish most of our manufacturing restructuring activity.
This now allows us to minimize costs while optimizing production to more efficiently manage inventory levels and improve margins and cash flow.
We're in a significantly better position with our manufacturing operations rightsized for the current environment, while also being well-positioned to ramp up quickly.
We still have some absorption-related inefficiencies, but we expect these to go away quickly as growth returns.
OPEX was up 4.3% year over year, largely due to planned MiSight investment activity, including sales and marketing, regulatory, and R&D costs.
This resulted in consolidated operating margins of 26.8%, down from 28.5% last year.
This performance slightly exceeded expectations as we continued to effectively managing expenses, balancing costs against investment opportunities.
Interest expense for the quarter was $6.7 million, driven by lower interest rates and lower average debt and the effective tax rate was 11.1%.
Non-GAAP earnings per share was $3.16 with roughly 49.6 million average shares outstanding.
The year-over-year FX impact for the quarter to revenue and earnings per share was a positive $10.6 million and a positive $0.15.
Free cash flow was strong at $111 million, comprised of $218 million of operating cash flow offset by $107 million of CAPEX.
Net debt decreased by $76 million to $1.68 billion, and our adjusted leverage ratio decreased to 2.15 times.
Before moving to guidance, I want to mention an item you'll see disclosed in the tax footnote in our upcoming 10-K.
In November, as part of an internal restructuring to simplify our supply chain, CooperVision's intellectual property and related assets were transferred from Barbados to the U.K. Although this will impact our GAAP financials, including a significant onetime P&L benefit in Q1, along with offsetting adjustments over the next 10-plus years, we will exclude these entries from our non-GAAP results to ensure transparency.
We do not expect this having a material impact on our non-GAAP tax rate over this period.
We were hoping to give full-year guidance but the surging COVID cases in Europe and in the U.S., make that extremely difficult.
So we're providing only Q1 guidance at this time.
This includes consolidated revenues of $642 million to $670 million, down 1% to up 4% or down 3% to up 2% in constant currency.
CooperVision revenue of $482 million to $502 million, down 1% to up 4% or down 3% to up 1% in constant currency.
And CooperSurgical revenue of $160 million to $168 million, down 1% to up 4%, both as reported and in constant currency.
Non-GAAP earnings per share is expected to be in the range of $2.66 to $2.86.
As compared to last year, we expect the midpoint of our non-GAAP earnings per share guidance to be up $0.07 due to a positive $0.21 currency impact, offset by MiSight investment activity and slightly lower gross margins tied to unfavorable manufacturing absorption.
Below the line, we expect lower interest expense to be roughly offset by a higher effective tax rate.
Lastly, on cash flow.
We made significant progress completing our multiyear capacity expansion program and expect solid improvement in free cash flow moving forward as operating cash flow improves and CAPEX reduces.
In conclusion, even with COVID, we expect to start the year off well.
We have strong product lines, solid manufacturing, and distribution capabilities, growing key account relationships, plenty of MyDay capacity, and a dynamic myopia management business.
We plan to continue taking market share, and we look forward to COVID vaccines and better treatments returning markets to normal.
