Earlier today, we reported record levels of sales and earnings in our second quarter.
We continue to see a good recovery from the pandemic-related disruption last year, with strong double-digit growth in each of our retail, wholesale and International segments.
Profitability is meaningfully higher than last year and significantly better than our pre-pandemic performance.
Earnings in the second quarter were up over 70% compared to our second quarter 2019 earnings.
Over the past year, we made structural changes in our business to help us weather the pandemic and emerge stronger from it.
We focused our product offerings on fewer and better choices.
We dropped low-margin styles and reduced product choices by over 20%.
We then increased the mix of higher margin, longer life cycle product choices, including our new sustainable Little Planet brand and Bold Basics product offering.
We ran leaner on inventories and reduced low-margin clearance and off-price sales.
With a better mix of inventory, our marketing focused more on brand building and less on promotions.
We strengthened our e-commerce capabilities during the pandemic last year to improve the experience for our high-margin online customers, including curbside pickup, same-day pickup and ship-from-store capabilities.
We launched a new mobile app and invested in RFID capabilities that we believe will improve inventory accuracy, sell-throughs and margins.
And we doubled our store closure plan to edit out lower-margin stores that have a low penetration of omni-channel sales.
The collective benefit of fewer better product choices, fewer better higher-margin stores, a better mix of high-margin e-commerce customers, leaner inventories and fewer and better promotions drove a meaningful improvement in price realization and profitability in the second quarter and first half this year.
Given our strong first half performance and expected continued benefit of structural changes to our business, we have raised our sales and earnings forecast for 2021.
In the second half, we expect sales and gross profit will be higher than previously planned.
Given the positive trends in our business, we're planning higher levels of spending in the second half to expedite deliveries from Asia, to support higher demand for our brands and to overcome pandemic-related delays in production.
We're also increasing our investments in eCommerce capabilities, brand marketing and employee compensation, which was curtailed during -- last year during the height of the pandemic.
These investments are expected to enable a strong finish to this year, and more importantly, get us off to a good start in 2022.
If we're successful with our balance of year plan, we will achieve a record level of profitability this year and build a stronger foundation to grow on in the years ahead.
In terms of sales trends, the second quarter got off to a good start as warmer weather arrived in more parts of the country, and consumers began to update their children's spring and summer outfits.
We saw better-than-expected demand in each month of the quarter.
The third quarter has also gotten off to a good start.
Our Retail segment was the largest contributor to our second quarter sales and earnings.
The collective benefit of a stronger product offering, higher margin e-commerce sales and fewer low-margin stores enabled us to achieve the highest second quarter retail operating margin in over 10 years.
eCommerce continued to be our highest margin business in the quarter with penetration growing to 38% of our retail sales, up from 27% prior to the pandemic.
Our store sales and earnings meaningfully outperformed our expectations in the quarter driven by higher units and better price realization.
Comparisons to our 2020 results are less meaningful given the COVID-related store closures last year.
Compared to the second quarter of 2019, retail sales were higher despite nearly 60 fewer stores.
We're on track to close over 100 low margin stores this year.
We estimate that the store closures will reduce our retail sales by nearly $90 million this year compared to 2019 but will improve profitability by over $5 million.
We continue to see a meaningful lift in the profitability of our stores located in markets adjacent to the stores that we closed.
Those transferred sales flow through a very high margin given the fixed cost structure of our store model.
We paused our store opening plan during the pandemic and are only opening one store this year.
Our real estate team is evaluating new store opportunities in the top 20 U.S. markets.
We expect to resume opening stores beginning next year.
We'll share those plans with you after they're firmed up later this year.
We continue to see more customers taking advantage of our omni-channel capabilities.
90% of our stores are located in outdoor shopping centers, which makes it more convenient for consumers to shop online and pick up their purchases at our stores.
Over 30% of our online orders in the quarter were supported by our stores compared to less than 12% last year.
We're focused on providing a higher service level to our omni-channel customers because they are our highest value customers.
They shop more frequently and spend nearly three times more than our single-channel customers.
Our retail and marketing teams are focused on the upcoming back-to-school shopping season.
We recently launched a highly creative OshKosh brand campaign focused on back-to-school outfitting.
We expect to see a very good recovery in our back-to-school sales this year.
We saw good growth in our wholesale segment in the second quarter driven by our flagship Carter's brand.
Collectively, our exclusive brands had good growth on top of the surge in demand last year during COVID-related store closures.
Our exclusive brands contributed nearly 50% of our second quarter wholesale sales.
We also saw good growth with our OshKosh and Skip Hop brands.
Many of our wholesale customers are also seeing the benefits that we are seeing by running leaner on inventory commitments, driving higher sell-throughs with less end-of-season clearance sales and better margins.
For the year, we're expecting good double-digit growth in wholesale sales and earnings, and growth with nine of our top 10 customers.
Together with our wholesale customers, our global eCommerce sales grew to over $0.5 billion in the first half this year, up over 60% compared to 2019.
No other company in children's apparel has the breadth and depth of eCommerce distribution that Carter's has, working with the largest online retailers in the United States.
We were recently honored by Target as their vendor of the year, recognizing Carter's for its performance during the pandemic.
We launched our exclusive brand with Target 20 years ago.
It has been a significant source of growth for us.
It provided a good model to launch our exclusive brands for Walmart and Amazon and enabled us to extend the reach of our brands to three of the most successful retailers in the world.
Together with our wholesale customers, we saw growth in each of our age segments from a newborn to a 10-year-old child.
A high percentage of our sales through our wholesale customers are Baby apparel.
Our Carter's brand is a traffic driver for the national retailers.
It's the brand consumers expect to see when shopping for their new baby.
Carter's is the best-selling brand in children's apparel.
It's the most recommended brand by moms for moms and has the highest level of social media engagement in kids apparel.
The latest U.S. market data suggests Carter's was the fastest-growing brand in young children's apparel in the second quarter.
Our sales growth in the second quarter was driven by Baby apparel with sales up over 30%.
Earlier estimates had suggested 300,000 to 500,000 fewer children would be born this year in the United States due to the pandemic.
First, we're estimated to decrease as much as 8% to 14% versus 2020.
The latest data from the CDC reflects first this year are down only 5%.
With the continued benefit of government stimulus, including the enhanced child tax credit, we may see a moderation in the decline in birth that would be good for our country and our company.
We also saw good growth in our toddler and kid size apparel.
The early read on back-to-school products like graphic tees, denim, uniforms is good.
Casual and comfortable styling continues to outperform special occasional fitting.
That said, with more people traveling, even the fancier outfits are picking up as parents are reconnecting with family and friends.
Our International segment was also a good contributor to our growth in the quarter.
International sales nearly doubled, recovering nicely from the pandemic-related disruption last year.
Our operations in Canada and Mexico had good growth despite COVID-related store closures.
More than half of our stores in Canada were closed for most of the second quarter due to government mandates.
We also saw good growth with our international wholesale partners, including Amazon.
eCommerce sales through our international segment grew by nearly 70% in the first half of this year driven by Canada and Amazon.
The drivers of our growth in international markets include new omni-channel capabilities launched in Canada earlier this year.
Consumers in Canada are responding very positively to the convenience of shopping online and picking up their purchases in our stores.
We are the largest specialty retailer of children's apparel in Canada with more than three times the share of our nearest competitor.
In Mexico, we plan to replicate the success we've achieved through our co-branded store model in the United States and Canada.
Over the next five years, we plan to convert all of our stores in Mexico to the co-branded model.
Mexico also launched eCommerce capabilities last year, and it's off to a good start, better than we had planned.
Our Simple Joys brand sold internationally through Amazon, is expected to be a meaningful source of growth for us in the years ahead.
Our wholesale relationships with retailers in Brazil and the Middle East are also expected to be good contributors to our growth.
With respect to our supply chain, we continue to be challenged by two to three week delays in the receipt of product from Asia.
This is a macro challenge affecting many retailers.
Transportation-related delays have improved relative to the first quarter, but COVID-related factory delays have continued to impact deliveries as infections from the virus appear to be outpacing access to vaccines in Asia.
We expect late deliveries will continue in the balance of the year, and we've reflected that risk in our forecasts.
To mitigate that exposure, we are expediting deliveries at a higher cost.
To the extent possible, we are also moving production schedules up to mitigate pandemic-related delays in Asia and the West Coast ports.
To date, we have not seen any meaningful order cancellations due to late deliveries to higher risk than usual.
Our freight costs will be higher this year, but they are being offset by better sell-throughs of our product offerings, fewer promotions, better price realization and higher margins.
We've had the benefit of lower product costs this year, but our suppliers are seeing inflation in cotton and polyester prices, which will impact our product costs beginning with our spring 2022 product offerings.
We have raised our prices for spring 2022 to maintain product margins next year.
Those price increases have been agreed to by our wholesale customers given the macro environment.
It is our intention to continue improving margins through SKU productivity, marketing effectiveness, store rationalization and better price realization.
In summary, we've had a good first half, and we are now projecting a much stronger-than-expected recovery from the pandemic.
Carter's continues to lead the market because of the strength of our brands, unparalleled market distribution and over 19,000 store locations and nearly 20,000 employees worldwide working to provide the very best value and experience in young children's apparel.
I'll begin on page two with our GAAP income statement for the second quarter.
Net sales were $746 million, up 45% from last year.
Reported operating income was $108 million compared to $21 million last year, and reported earnings per share was $1.62 compared to $0.19 a year ago.
Last year's second quarter results were heavily affected in the early days of the pandemic by store closures, which began in mid-March and continued through the balance of the second quarter, and the suspension of shipments to many of our wholesale customers.
Our second quarter results for 2021 and 2020 included unusual items, which are summarized on page three.
We've treated these items as non-GAAP adjustments to our reported results to enable greater comparability and provide insight into the underlying performance of the business.
My remarks today will speak to our results on an adjusted basis, which excludes these unusual items.
On page four, we summarize some highlights of our second quarter performance over the past three years.
Given the significant disruption to our business and the broader marketplace in last year's second quarter, we expected to post good growth over 2020, which we delivered.
As the chart indicates, we also delivered growth over our 2019 performance, especially in profitability.
Certainly, the recovery from the pandemic has been a significant contributor to our performance, but we've also made some fundamental improvements to our business, many of which Mike just enumerated.
We believe these factors will continue to drive our business going forward.
Moving to page five and our adjusted P&L for the second quarter.
Building on the 45% increase in net sales, gross profit grew at an even greater rate 57%, to $369 million.
Gross margin improved 370 basis points to 49.4%, a fifth consecutive quarterly record for us.
For reference, this year's second quarter gross margin was 540 basis points over what we achieved in 2019.
The expansion in our gross margin over last year was driven by strong product performance and strong wholesale customer and retail consumer demand.
We were less promotional in our U.S. retail business.
And saw a good recovery in demand for our core Carter's brand in the wholesale channel.
Product margins in the quarter were also helped by lower product costs.
These benefits were offset somewhat by higher transportation costs incurred in response to the supply chain disruptions that many companies are experiencing currently.
Royalty income nearly doubled to $7 million, driven by recovery in demand across our domestic and international licensees.
Adjusted SG&A increased 34% to $265 million, reflecting higher store payroll expenses given store closures a year ago, the restoration of compensation provisions, which were curtailed a year ago, and higher marketing spend.
Spending was lighter than we had planned, some portion of which was due to timing and will shift into the second half of the year.
Given the strong growth in net sales, SG&A leveraged 300 basis points to 35.5% of sales.
Adjusted operating income nearly tripled from $41 million to $110 million, and adjusted operating margin improved 680 basis points to 14.8%, reflecting our gross margin expansion and expense leverage.
On the bottom line, adjusted earnings per share was $1.67, up meaningfully from $0.54 in last year's second quarter.
Moving to page six.
Our balance sheet continues to be in great shape.
Our liquidity remains strong.
We ended the quarter with over $1 billion in cash on hand, and our total liquidity was nearly $2 billion when considering the availability under our credit facility.
Accounts receivable were fairly consistent year-over-year.
As expected, we saw a significant growth in wholesale sales.
Most of our customers have returned to their pre-pandemic terms.
And we've had good payment trends.
Quarter-end net inventories declined 8% to $620 million.
The quality of our inventory is very good, given strong demand and meaningfully lower excess inventory versus this time last year.
We're projecting that inventory will grow year-over-year through the balance of the year, in part because of how constrained second half inventory was a year ago.
And also, we're trying to bring in inventory earlier where we can, given the disruptions we've experienced in the supply chain.
We're expecting year-end net inventory to be up in the high single digits over the end of last year due to our efforts to accelerate product receipts and to support good planned demand in the first part of next year.
Our long-term debt is down over $240 million versus last year when we were partially drawn on our revolver.
Those borrowings were repaid in the second half of last year.
Given our strong first half performance, cash flow from operations was $50 million.
This was down from last year when our working capital initiatives in response to the pandemic yielded unusually strong cash flow, particularly for the first part of the year.
As we announced on our last call, our Board of Directors approved the resumption of our quarterly dividend, which was paid at $0.40 per share in the second quarter.
Given our strong liquidity and our improving outlook for the business, we continue to evaluate additional opportunities to return capital, including share repurchases over time.
Turning to page eight with a summary of our business segment performance in the second quarter.
Each of our segments grew net sales and profit dollars, and we saw substantial operating margin expansion in both the U.S. Retail and International segments.
In U.S. Wholesale, we saw improved profitability in several aspects of the business, including improved product margins and favorable mix with strong sales of the Carter's brand.
These gains were offset by higher transportation costs to expedite delayed product from Asia.
Corporate expenses as a percentage of net sales increased slightly to 3.8%, reflecting higher compensation provisions and consulting fees in support of our productivity initiatives.
Overall, our consolidated adjusted operating margin expanded to 14.8%.
Now for some additional information on each of our segment's performance in the second quarter, beginning with U.S. Retail on page nine.
We posted strong sales in our Retail segment above our expectations.
Our outperformance was driven by our stores and improved price realization.
As expected, eCommerce sales were down versus last year, given the surge in online consumer demand, especially in the early part of the pandemic.
As Mike noted, we have continued to make progress in improving the quality of our store portfolio and have closed nearly 90 stores year-to-date.
Profitability in the Retail segment improved substantially.
Gross margin and operating margin expanded due to the improvements in how we've been managing the business, including improved inventory management and lower promotional activity.
Now turning to page 10.
An important event in the quarter was the refresh of our core Baby assortment.
Previously, these products had carried the Little Baby Basics names.
This year, we've rebranded these offerings as My First Love in order to better capture the joy and emotion, which accompany the arrival of a new child.
These products are made with 100% Oeko-Tex certified cotton, which certifies that the manufacturing processes for our products eliminate exposure to potentially harmful chemicals.
We launched the My First love collection in June with a first of its kind live digital shopping event on carters.com, featuring styles curated by Bachelor Alum and Mom, Jade Roper Tolbert.
We're seeing strong consumer response to this year's launch in all of our channels.
Turning to page 11.
One of the most significant contributors to retail growth over the past several years has been our Age Up strategy.
The extension of our age and size ranges under the Carter's brand has been very well received by consumers and has allowed us to extend the length of our customer relationships and increase their lifetime value to us.
As shown on the slide, our Age Up product offering is comprised of differentiated and complementary assortments, including Carter's and OshKosh branded product.
Turning to page 12.
In addition to Carter's, the other great children's apparel brand in our portfolio is OshKosh B'gosh.
We acquired OshKosh in 2005 as a strategic and complementary brand, given its focus on playwear with its sweet spot in the toddler age range.
Since then, we have integrated the brand in all of our channels, stores, online and wholesale in the U.S., Canada and Mexico.
This iconic brand has over 125 years of rich history with a well-deserved reputation for quality and value.
We have photos in our archives of John F. Kennedy and Ronald Dragon visiting OshKosh facilities.
This is a brand whose history is intertwined with that of our country.
Over the past few years, we've made some significant changes to OshKosh, improving the focus and productivity of its assortments and updating the aesthetic to be even more unique and differentiated in the market.
We're currently on track to achieve the best year yet in OshKosh profitability.
Today, consumers rank OshKosh as one of the most recommended and durable children's wear brands, and one which they are proud to give as a gift.
Turning to page 13.
Building on this iconic heritage, our marketing team has developed a very creative new brand campaign for OshKosh.
The Today is someday campaign, Spotlights notable Trailblazers as children.
In the first series of ads, young versions of Mariah Carey, Mohammad Ali and Outcast all share messages of confidence and determination and encouraging the next generation to dream boldly about who they will become someday, all while wearing their OshKosh outfits.
The campaign is off to a strong start, generating outstanding impressions and consumer touch points since its launch.
Moving to page 14.
As we told you on our last call, we recently launched Little Planet by Carter's.
This brand has an overall emphasis on organic materials and sustainability, both of which are increasingly important to today's consumers.
Little Planet is also available in over 400 target stores nationwide, and we're planning to launch the brand on Amazon in spring 2022.
Our data suggests that Little Planet is attracting a largely new customer to Carter's.
And in the second half, we've allocated additional marketing spend to support Little Planet's continued growth and introduction to new customers.
page 15 highlights another important investment that we're making in our retail business.
We're currently implementing an RFID technology solution in our U.S. stores.
This technology is intended to improve our in-store inventory accuracy and support our growing omni-channel demand by making a broader range of in-store inventory available to consumers shopping online and opting for in-store pickup.
Additionally, it's expected to increase efficiency across numerous tasks in the store, better leveraging store labor and freeing up our associates to spend more time interacting with customers.
Ultimately, we believe RFID will be an important tool in our objective to run a higher-margin retail business through better inventory management.
We expect to complete the RFID rollout this fall, realizing some benefits beginning in the fourth quarter and more meaningful contributions in 2022 and beyond.
Moving to page 16, and our U.S. Wholesale business.
As expected, we posted strong sales growth in this part of our business in the second quarter.
A year ago, many of our wholesale customers canceled or deferred their orders as their stores closed in response to the pandemic.
While sales were strong across wholesale, the largest contributor to growth was increased demand for our core margin-rich Carter's brand.
Our My First Love assortment launched at wholesale in June, and we're seeing good performance and strong replenishment demand in this channel.
Overall segment profit increased to $41 million in the quarter, albeit at a lower margin rate as transportation costs were elevated and given favorable changes in inventory reserves, which occurred in last year's second quarter.
On page 17, our Simple Joys brand sold on Amazon continues to be an important presence for Carter's online.
Amazon shifted its meaningful Prime Day event back into the summer months this year, Simple Joys was featured prominently on the Amazon Prime Day banner page, along with other leading brands such as Keurig and Levi's.
Over the two day June prime event, sales of Simple Joys increased 70% over last year.
Page 18 features some of our recent marketing efforts with Kohl's, one of our most significant customers of the core Carter's brand in the wholesale channel.
This year, our marketing focused on launching the My First Love collection as part of Kohl's Baby sale in June.
Turning to page 19, and second quarter results for our International segment.
We saw strong growth in our International business in the second quarter, where sales nearly doubled to $91 million.
Canada was the largest contributor to our growth as sales in this market increased 75% over last year.
A good portion of our store base in Canada was closed for much of the second quarter due to the reimposition of government safety mandates.
Despite this, our stores outperformed our expectations, driven by strong consumer demand and improved price realization.
eCommerce was also strong in Canada with strong demand while the stores were closed as well as increasing utilization of the new omni-channel capabilities now in place in this market.
Business in Mexico and with our international partners also performed well in the second quarter.
Profitability in the International segment increased significantly over the loss posted last year driven by strong sales growth, improved product margin and expense leverage.
On page 20, our partnership with Riachuelo in Brazil continues to expand.
This new store recently opened in Rio de Janeiro.
Riachuelo currently distributes the Carter's brand in 260 of its own department stores and has opened seven stand-alone Carter's stores in Brazil.
Riachuelo is planning on having approximately 25 Carter's stores in Brazil by the end of 2021.
Riachuelo is also planning to develop the eCommerce channel later this year.
Despite the significant cover disruptions in Brazil, demand for the Carter's brand in this important market has been very strong.
On page 21, one of our most important international markets is the Middle East.
This region has been particularly hard hit in the past couple of years with lower oil prices and also by the impact of COVID.
But now with the price of oil having increased and the world beginning to open up, the outlook in this part of the world is improving.
Our partner recently opened this beautiful new Carter's store in the United Arab Emirates.
Our partner has nearly 40 stores in the Middle East, and the UAE is home to the largest freestanding Carter's store outside of North America.
Many stores in this market are some of the most productive Carter's stores in the world.
As we've mentioned on past calls, we've stepped up our focus on all things ESG.
And in this inaugural report, we provide a good overview of our commitments across a number of areas, including our sourcing activities, stewardship of the environment and workforce diversity.
On page s 23 and 24, we summarized our adjusted results for the first half of the year.
It's been a great start to 2021 with sales in the first six months, up 31% and significant gross margin expansion and SG&A leverage.
Our first half adjusted operating margin was 15.6% compared to low single-digits last year.
I'll note that our first half 2021 sales and earnings performance exceeded what we achieved prior to the pandemic in 2019.
It's also worth noting the strong improvement in our adjusted EBITDA in the first half of the year.
This performance obviously reflects the broader recovery in the marketplace after the historic disruptions of a year ago, but also the fundamental changes and improvements to how we run the business as we've been sharing with you.
Now turning to our outlook for the balance of the year, beginning on page 26.
On balance, we're optimistic about our prospects for the second half of the year.
We've raised our forecast for second half demand, even though there remains a good deal of uncertainty and risk in the marketplace.
We believe a number of factors will drive our second half, and we've summarized some of them on this slide.
As we've been discussing, we believe we've made some fundamental changes to how we run the business, and we intend to continue these disciplines going forward in areas such as assortment and SKU productivity, marketing efficiency and inventory management.
These changes have enabled the very strong gross margin performance we have posted the last number of quarters.
There are a number of issues, though, many outside of our control that we continue to monitor closely.
In recent days and weeks, the Delta COVID variant has emerged as a significant threat to the ongoing recovery of the country and world from the pandemic.
Infections and hospitalizations have been rising.
The impact on key aspects of our business is unknown, such as kids returning to school, which we expect will contribute to a very good back-to-school -- to very good back-to-school apparel sales.
We've mentioned factory and transportation delays, and we expect these issues may persist through the second half.
We've already incurred significant and unusual expense to expedite delivery of our product to the United States.
As we've demonstrated over the last 18 months or so, we intend to continue to actively manage through whatever the situation turns out to be, and we're well positioned to do so.
Turning to page 27.
We're fortunate, given our very strong first half performance, to be able to continue to invest in the business, especially when our senses, many others are retrenching.
While our demand forecast for the second half has increased, we will have higher spending relative to our previous expectations.
Some of the spending represents investments for the long term, including on technologies such as continuing to enhance our eCommerce and digital capabilities, upgrading our point-of-sale system in stores and adding new capabilities around pricing, data and analytics and RFID.
We will also spend more on marketing in the second half, some spend related to the OshKosh brand campaign, and higher spend on digital marketing, which has proven very effective for us.
We're also increasing our provisions for performance and other compensation for our employees, which were curtailed a year ago in response to the pandemic.
It's a competitive market out there, and this is one element of retaining and motivating our outstanding team.
Other spending is related to business continuity.
We will spend much more than typical on transportation costs.
Market rates have increased substantially through COVID, and we're spending extraordinary amounts on expediting delayed product.
This additional spending and some differences in the timing of revenue will affect the comparability of this year's second half to 2020.
It's important to look at the year in total, given these comparability issues, and we expect 2021 will turn out to represent extraordinary performance for Carter's.
Moving to page 28, and our specific thoughts on the outlook for the third quarter and full year.
For the third quarter, we're expecting net sales of approximately $960 million, adjusted operating income of approximately $110 million and adjusted earnings per share of approximately $1.60.
Today, we're raising our sales and earnings outlook for the full year.
We're now projecting net sales growth of approximately 15%, up from our previous view of 10%.
We've meaningfully increased our expectation for earnings growth.
Adjusted operating income is now expected to be approximately $475 million, up from our previous view of about $400 million.
If we achieve our forecast, this would represent record operating income and a very strong operating margin of about 13.5%.
Adjusted earnings per share is expected to grow approximately 75%, up from our prior view of plus 40%.
So finally, on page 29, here's a graphical depiction of our expected performance, dropping in our guidance for full year 2021.
We're not forecasting that we will get fully back to 2019's level of net sales, and that's all right with us.
With our focus on profitability, we're not repeating low margin sales from last year through the off-price channel or from low-margin stores, which are being closed.
Achievement of this forecast would represent a terrific year for us, and we're focused on executing a very strong second half of the year.
