dollargeneral.com under news and events.
We also will reference certain non-GAAP financial measures.
dollargeneral.com under news and events.
Our fourth quarter performance was impacted by sustained and rising inflation, ongoing global supply chain pressure and a surge in Omicron cases, which impacted staffing levels at our distribution centers, contributing to elevated out-of-stocks.
Despite these challenging conditions, our teams continued to focus on controlling what we can control and being there for our customers.
Because of their efforts and great execution over the past two years, we believe our underlying business is even stronger than before the pandemic, which positions us well to deliver solid sales and profit growth in 2022 and beyond.
And while we expect this challenging environment to persist over the near term, which is reflected in our Q1 and fiscal 2022 outlook, we're confident we are taking the appropriate actions to manage through this period and deliver on our full year plan.
In fact, I'm pleased to report our staffing levels are back to 2019 pre-COVID levels in both our stores and distribution centers, and we are seeing a meaningful improvement in our in-stock positions.
Additionally, although we experienced higher-than-expected product and supply chain cost in Q4, we are very confident in our price position as our price indexes, relative to competitors and other classes of trade, remain in line with our targeted and historical ranges.
And because so many families depend on us for everyday essentials at the right price, we believe products at the $1 price point are important to our customers, and they will continue to have a significant presence in our assortment.
In fact, approximately 20% of our overall assortment is $1 or less.
And moving forward, we expect to continue to foster and grow this program where appropriate.
population, we believe we are well positioned to continue supporting our customers through our unique combination of value and convenience, even in a challenging economic environment.
Looking ahead, we remain focused on advancing our operating priorities and strategic initiatives as we continue to strengthen our competitive position while further differentiating Dollar General from the rest of the retail landscape.
Turning now to our fourth quarter performance.
Net sales increased 2.8% to $8.7 billion, following a 17.6% increase in Q4 of 2020.
Comp sales declined 1.4% compared to the prior year period, which translates into a robust 11.3% increase on a two-year stack basis.
From a monthly cadence perspective, Comp sales were lowest in January, with December being our strongest month of performance.
Our fourth quarter sales results include a decline in customer traffic, which was largely offset by growth in average basket size.
Notably, our average basket size at year-end was approximately $16 and consisted of nearly six items.
This compares to an average basket size of about $13 and five items at the end of 2019, which we believe reflects the growing impact of our strategic initiatives and a degree of inflation.
In addition, we are pleased with the market share gains as measured by syndicated data in our frozen and refrigerated product categories, where we have placed a good deal of emphasis over the past years in an effort to provide customers with an even wider variety of options.
And even as our market share in highly consumable product sales decreased slightly in Q4, we feel good about our share gains on a two-year basis.
We are also pleased with the retention rates of new customers acquired in 2020, which continues to exceed our initial expectations.
For the full year, net sales increased 1.4% to $34.2 billion, which was on the high end of our full year guidance and on top of a robust 21.6% increase in fiscal 2020.
Comp sales for the year decreased 2.8%, which translates into a very healthy 13.5% increase on a two-year stack basis.
In total, we completed more than 2,900 real estate projects during the year, including the opening of our 18,000th Dollar General store and 50 stand-alone pOpshelf locations as we continue to build and strengthen the foundation for future growth.
From a position of strength, we also made targeted investments in key areas, including the acceleration of our pOpshelf concept, as well as our most recent initiatives focused on health and international expansion as we continue to meet the evolving needs of our customers and further position Dollar General for long-term sustainable growth.
Overall, we are proud of our fourth quarter and full year results, which further validate our belief that our strategic actions and targeted investments positions us well for continued success while supporting long-term shareholder value creation.
We operate in one of the most attractive sectors in retail.
And while our mission and culture remain unchanged as the foundation for our success, with our robust portfolio of short and long-term initiatives, I believe Dollar General is a much different company and is in a much stronger competitive position than it was just a few short years ago.
As a result, I've never felt better about the underlying business model, and we are excited about the enormous growth opportunities we see ahead.
Now, that Todd has taken you through a few highlights of the quarter and the full year, let me take you through some of its important financial details.
Unless we specifically note otherwise, all comparisons are year over year, all references to earnings per share refer to diluted earnings per share and all years noted refer to the corresponding fiscal year.
As Todd already discussed sales, I will start with gross profit.
As a reminder, gross profit in Q4 2020 and fiscal year 2020 were both positively impacted by a significant increase in sales, including net sales growth of 24% and 28%, respectively, in our combined non-consumables categories.
For Q4 2021, gross profit as a percentage of sales was 31.2%, a decrease of 131 basis points.
The decrease compared to Q4 2020 was primarily attributable to a higher LIFO provision, increased transportation and distribution costs and a greater proportion of sales coming from our consumables category.
Of note, while we expect some relief as we move through 2022, our Q4 supply chain expenses were significantly higher compared to Q4 2020, resulting in a headwind to gross margin of approximately $100 million.
These factors were partially offset by a reduction in markdowns as a percentage of sales in higher inventory markups.
SG&A as a percentage of sales was 22% in the quarter, a decrease of 16 basis points.
This decrease was primarily driven by lower incremental costs related to COVID-19, lower hurricane-related expenses and a reduction in incentive compensation.
These items were partially offset by certain expenses that were higher as a percentage of sales, including retail labor, occupancy costs, and depreciation and amortization.
Moving down the income statement.
Operating profit for the fourth quarter decreased 8.7% to $797 million.
As a percentage of sales, operating profit was 9.2%, a decrease of 116 basis points.
Our effective tax rate for the quarter was 21.2% and compares to 22.7% in the fourth quarter last year.
Finally, earnings per share for the fourth quarter decreased 1.9% to $2.57, which reflects a compound annual growth rate of 10.6% over a two-year period.
Turning now to our balance sheet and cash flow, which remained strong and provided us the financial flexibility to continue investing for the long term while delivering significant returns to shareholders.
Merchandise inventories were $5.6 billion at the end of the year, an increase of 7% overall and 1.4% on a per store basis.
Importantly, as Todd noted, we have begun to see a meaningful improvement in our in-stock levels since the end of the year and expect continued improvement as we move through 2022, underscoring our optimism that we are well positioned to serve our customers with the products they want and need.
In 2021, we generated significant cash flow from operations totaling $2.9 billion.
Total capital expenditures for the year were $1.1 billion and included our planned investments in new stores, remodels and relocations, distribution and transportation projects and spending related to our strategic initiatives.
During the quarter, we repurchased 2.2 million shares of our common stock for $490 million and paid a quarterly dividend of $0.42 per common share outstanding at a total cost of $97 million.
At the end of the year, the remaining share repurchase authorization was $2.1 billion.
Our capital allocation priorities continue to serve us well and remain unchanged.
Our first priority is investing in high-return growth opportunities, including new store expansion and our strategic initiatives.
We also remain committed to returning significant cash to shareholders through anticipated share repurchases and quarterly dividend payments, all while maintaining our current investment-grade credit rating and managing to a leverage ratio of approximately three times adjusted debt to EBITDAR.
Moving to our financial outlook for fiscal 2022.
First, I want to remind everyone that our fiscal year 2022 includes a 53rd week which will occur during the last period of the fourth quarter.
We also continue to operate in a time of uncertainty regarding, among other things, the impacts on the business arising from the current geopolitical conflict and the recovery from the global COVID pandemic, including recovery of the U.S. economy, changes in consumer behavior, labor markets and government stimulus and assistance programs.
Despite these uncertainties, including cost inflation, ongoing pressure in the supply chain and rising fuel costs, we are pleased to provide annual guidance that reflects our confidence in the business.
With that in mind, we expect the following for 2022.
Net sales growth of approximately 10%, including an estimated benefit of approximately two percentage points from the 53rd week, same-store sales growth of approximately 2.5%, and earnings per share growth of approximately 12% to 14%, including an estimated benefit of approximately four percentage points from the 53rd week.
Our earnings per share guidance assumes an effective tax rate range of 22.5% to 23%.
We also expect capital spending to be in the range of $1.4 billion to $1.5 billion, which includes the impact of increases in the cost of certain building materials, as well as continued investment in our strategic initiatives and core business to support and drive future growth.
With regards to shareholder returns, our board of directors recently approved a quarterly dividend payment of $0.55 per share, which represents an increase of 31%.
We also plan to repurchase a total of approximately $2.75 billion of our common stock this year, reflecting our continued strong liquidity position, the benefit from the 53rd week and our confidence in the long-term growth opportunity for our business.
Let me now provide some additional context as it relates to our outlook.
In terms of quarterly cadence, we anticipate both comp sales and earnings per share growth to be much stronger in the second half of the year than the first half.
As a reminder, we are lapping a significant stimulus benefit from Q1 2021, including gross margin expansion of 208 basis points.
We also anticipate ongoing cost inflation, including elevated supply chain and fuel costs.
While we do not typically provide quarterly guidance, given the unusual lap in the significant inflationary environment in Q1, we are providing more specific detail on our expectations for the first quarter.
To that end, we expect a comp sales decline of 1% to 2% in Q1 with an earnings per share in the range of approximately $2.25 to $2.35.
Turning now to gross margin for 2022.
We expect to continue realizing benefits from our initiatives, including DG Fresh and NCI.
In addition, we are optimistic that distribution and transportation efficiencies, including significant expansion of our private fleet, could drive additional benefits over the year despite continued cost pressures in the near term.
Partially offsetting some of these benefits are rising fuel costs, as well as an expected return to recent historical rates of markdowns and shrink, all of which are expected to be headwinds in 2022.
With regards to SG&A, we expect continued investments in our strategic initiatives as we further their rollouts.
However, in aggregate, we continue to expect they will positively contribute to operating profit and margin in 2022 as we expect the benefits to gross margin from our initiatives will more than offset the associated SG&A expense.
We also continue to pursue efficiencies and savings through our Save to Serve program, including Fast Track.
And we believe these savings in 2022 will offset a portion of an expected increase in wage inflation.
In summary, we are proud of our fourth quarter and full year results in 2021, which are a testament to the perseverance and execution by the team.
Looking ahead, we are excited about our plans for 2022, including our outlook for sales and earnings per share growth, as well as our planned significant returns to shareholders via an increased dividend payout and increased share repurchases.
As always, we continue to be disciplined in how we manage expenses and capital with the goal of delivering consistent, strong financial performance while strategically investing in our business and employees for the long term.
We remain confident in our business model and our ongoing financial priorities to drive profitable same-store sales growth, healthy new store returns, strong free cash flow and long-term shareholder value.
Let me take the next few minutes to update you on our operating priorities and strategic initiatives, including our plans for 2022.
Our first operating priority is driving profitable sales growth.
We have a growing portfolio of initiatives which are contributing to our strong results, as well as strengthening the foundation for future growth.
Let me take you through some of the recent highlights, as well as some of our next steps.
Starting with our non-consumables initiative, or NCI, which was available in more than 11,700 stores at the end of 2021.
We continued to be very pleased with the strong sales and margin performance we are seeing across the NCI store base.
Notably, NCI stores outperformed non-NCI stores in both average ticket and customer traffic, driving an incremental 2.5% total comp sales increase on average in NCI stores, along with a meaningful improvement in gross margin rate.
We expect to realize ongoing sales and margin benefits from NCI in 2022, and we are on track to complete the rollout across nearly the entire chain by the end of the year.
Moving to our newest store concept, pOpshelf, which further builds on our success and learnings with NCI.
As a reminder, pOpshelf aims to engage customers by offering a fun, affordable and differentiated treasure hunt experience delivered through continually refreshed merchandise, a differentiated in-store experience and exceptional value, with the vast majority of our items priced at $5 or less.
During the quarter, we opened 25 new pOpshelf locations, bringing the total number of stores to 55 and exceeding our initial goal of 50 stores.
Additionally, we opened 11 new store within a store concepts during Q4, bringing the total number of Dollar General Market stores with a smaller-footprint pOpshelf store included to a total of 25 at the end of the year.
And we continue to be pleased with the results.
In 2022, we plan to nearly triple the pOpshelf store count and open up to an additional 25 store-within-a-store concepts, which would bring us to a total of more than 150 stand-alone pOpshelf locations and a total of approximately 50 store-within-a-store concepts.
We continue to anticipate year one annualized sales volumes for our current locations to be between $1.7 million and $2 million per store and expect the average gross margin rate for these stores to exceed 40%.
In addition to the early success of pOpshelf, we have been able to take some of our learnings and apply them in our Dollar General store base, particularly in further enhancing our nonconsumables offering.
Overall, we are very pleased with the results from this unique and differentiated concept, and we are excited about our goal of approximately 1,000 pOpshelf locations by year-end 2025.
Turning now to DG Fresh, which is a strategic, multi-phased shift to self-distribution of frozen and refrigerated goods, along with a focus on driving continued sales growth in these areas.
As a reminder, we completed the initial rollout of DG Fresh across the entire chain in 2021 and are now delivering to more than 18,000 stores from 12 facilities.
The primary objective of DG Fresh is to reduce product cost on our frozen and refrigerated items, and we continue to be very pleased with the savings we are seeing.
Notably, DG Fresh was a meaningful positive contributor to our gross margin rate in 2021, and we expect to see continued benefits in 2022.
Another important goal of DG Fresh is to increase sales in our frozen and refrigerated categories.
We are pleased with the performance on this front, including enhanced product offerings in stores and strong performance from our perishables department.
In fact, our perishables department had a high single-digit comp increase in Q4 and contributed more comp sales dollars than any other department for both Q4 and the full year.
Importantly, the sales penetration of these categories has increased to approximately 9% as compared to approximately 8% prior to the rollout of DG Fresh.
In 2022, we expect to realize additional benefits from DG Fresh as we continue to optimize our network, further leverage our scale and deliver an even wider product selection.
And while produce is not included in our initial rollout, we continue to believe that DG Fresh provides a potential path forward to expanding our produce offering to more than 10,000 stores over time.
To that end, at the end of Q4, we offered produce in more than 2,100 stores, with plans to expand this offering to a total of more than 3,000 stores by the end of 2022.
Finally, DG Fresh has also extended the reach of our cooler expansion program.
During 2021, we added more than 65,000 cooler doors across our store base.
In 2022, we again expect to install more than 65,000 additional doors as we continue to build on our multiyear track record of growth in cooler doors and associated sales.
Turning now to an update on our expanded health offering, which consists of up to 30% more feet of selling space and up to 400 additional items as compared to our standard offering.
This offering was available in nearly 1,200 stores at the end of 2021, with plans to expand to a total of more than 4,000 stores by the end of 2022.
As we move toward becoming more of a health destination, particularly in rural America, our plans include further expansion of our health offering, with the goal of increasing access to basic healthcare products and ultimately services over time.
In addition to the gross margin benefits associated with the initiatives I just discussed, we continue to pursue other opportunities to enhance gross margin, including improvements in private brand sales, global sourcing, supply chain efficiencies and shrink reduction.
Our second priority is capturing growth opportunities.
Our proven high-return, low-risk real estate model has served us well for many years and continues to be a core strength of our business.
In 2021, we completed a total of 2,902 real estate projects, including 1,050 new stores, 1,752 remodels and 100 relocations.
For 2022, we remain on track to execute nearly 3,000 real estate projects in total, including 1,110 new stores, 1,750 remodels and 120 store relocations.
As a reminder, we expect approximately 800 of our new stores in 2022 to be in our larger, 8,500 square foot store format, allowing for an expanded assortment and room to accommodate future growth as we respond to our customers' desire for an even wider product selection.
Importantly, we continue to be very pleased with the sales productivity of all of our larger-format stores as average sales per square foot are about 15% above an average traditional store.
In addition to our planned Dollar General and pOpshelf growth in 2022, and included in our expected new store total, we are very excited about our plans to expand internationally with the goal of opening up to 10 stores in Mexico by the end of 2022.
Overall, our real estate pipeline remains robust with more brick-and-mortar stores than any retailer in the country.
And we are excited about our ability to capture significant growth opportunities in the years ahead.
Next, our digital initiative, which is an important complement to our physical footprint as we continue to deploy and leverage technology to further enhance convenience and access for our customers.
Our efforts remain centered around building engagement across our digital properties, including our mobile app.
We ended 2021 with over million monthly active users on the app and expect this number to grow as we look to further enhance our digital offerings.
As with everything we do, the customer is at the center of our digital initiative.
Our partnership with DoorDash is the latest example of these efforts as we look to extend the value offering of Dollar General, combined with the convenience of same-day delivery in an hour or less.
This offering was available in more than 10,700 stores at the end of Q4, and we are very pleased with the early results, including our ability to generate profitable transactions, as well as better-than-expected customer trial, strong repurchase rates, high levels of sales incrementality and a broadening of our customer base.
In addition, our DG Media Network is becoming increasingly more relevant in connecting our brand partners with our customers.
To that end, we significantly grew the reach of this network in 2021, increasing from 6 million unique active profiles to more than 75 million, enabling our vendors to now reach over 90% of our DG customers through the DG Media Network.
After establishing the foundation over the last few years, we are poised to meaningfully grow this business in 2022 and beyond as we expand the program and enhance the value proposition for both our customers and brand partners while increasing the overall net financial benefit for the business.
Overall, our strategy consists of building a digital ecosystem specifically tailored to provide our customers with an even more convenient, frictionless and personalized shopping experience.
And we are pleased with the growing engagement we are seeing across our digital properties.
Our third operating priority is to leverage and reinforce our position as a low-cost operator.
We have a clear and defined process to control spending which continues to govern our disciplined approach to spending decisions.
This zero-based budgeting approach, internally branded as Save to Serve, keeps the customer at the center of all we do while reinforcing our cost control mindset.
Notably, the Save to Serve program contributed more than $800 million in cumulative cost savings from its inception in 2015 through the end of 2021.
Our Fast Track initiative is a great example of this approach, where our goals include increasing labor productivity in our stores, enhancing customer convenience and further improving on-shelf availability.
The first phase of Fast Track consisted of both rolltainer and case pack optimization, which has led to the more efficient stocking of our stores.
The second component of Fast Track is self-checkout, which provides customers with another flexible and convenient checkout solution while also driving greater efficiencies for our store associates.
Self-checkout was available in more than 6,100 stores at the end of 2021.
We continue to be pleased with our results, including strong and growing customer adoption rates and high scores on speed and ease of checkout.
In 2022, we plan to expand this offering to a total of up to 11,000 stores by the end of the year as we look to further extend our position as an innovative leader in small box discount retail.
Looking ahead, the next phase of Fast Track consists of increasing our utilization of emerging technology and data strategies, which includes putting new digital tools in the hands of our field leaders in 2022.
When combined with our data-driven inventory management, we believe these efforts will reduce store workload and drive greater efficiencies for our retail associates and leaders.
I also want to highlight our growing private fleet, which consisted of more than 700 tractors and accounted for approximately 20% of our outbound transportation fleet at the end of 2021.
We are focused on significantly expanding our private fleet in 2022, as we plan to more than double the number of tractors, we expect will account for approximately 40% of our outbound transportation fleet by the end of the year.
Importantly, we save an average of 20% of associated costs every time we replace a third-party tractor with one from our private fleet.
Moving forward, we believe our private fleet will become an increasingly significant competitive advantage as it gives us greater operational control in our supply chain while further optimizing our cost structure.
Our underlying principles are to keep the business simple, but move quickly to capture growth opportunities while controlling expenses and always seeking to be a low-cost operator.
Our fourth operating priority is investing in our diverse teams through development, empowerment and inclusion.
As a growing retailer, we created thousands of new jobs in 2021, providing career growth opportunities for existing associates and the start of a career for many others.
In 2022, we now expect to create more than 10,000 net new jobs as a result of our continued growth.
Our internal promotion pipeline remains robust, as evidenced by our internal placement of more than 75% of our store associates at or above the lead sales associate position.
We also continue to innovate on development for our teams to provide ongoing opportunities for career advancement, and in turn, meaningful wage growth.
These investments include offering an enhanced college tuition benefit for our associates and their families, as well as continuing to facilitate driver training programs for associates who would like to become drivers in our private fleet.
In addition to our focus on development, we continue to focus on further enhancing the associate experience and our strong workplace culture.
Collectively, these investments continue to yield positive results across our organization, including healthy applicant flow and strong critical staffing levels.
We believe the opportunity to start and develop a career with a growing and purpose-driven company is a unique competitive advantage and remains our greatest currency in attracting and retaining talent.
Overall, we made significant progress against our operating priorities and strategic initiatives in 2021.
These efforts have further strengthened our foundation and position heading into 2022 as we continue to drive long-term sustainable growth.
In closing, I'm proud of the team's strong and resilient performance in 2021.
As we enter 2022, we are laser-focused on executing and delivering our robust plans, which we believe will further enhance our unique combination of value and convenience for our customers while delivering strong returns for our shareholders.
