I hope everyone is staying healthy and safe.
Let's start on slide four.
We are making great progress this year at DTE for our team, our customers and our communities positioning us to deliver for our investors.
This progress has produced a strong second quarter and positions us well for continued growth.
Our company celebrated Juneteenth together last month with a series of virtual meetings, we pay tribute to this important day with global community partners.
A number of employees offered reflections on what the day means to them personally.
Overall, it was a great way to come together and honoured a significant holiday.
We continue to focus on service excellence for our customers and delivering clean, safe and reliable energy as we continue our clean energy transformation.
DTE Electric received approval from the MPSC to further expand the voluntary renewable program MIGreenPower, while also making it even more affordable, including increased access for low-income customers.
Additionally, we partnered with Ford Motor Company to install new rooftop solar and battery storage technology at the Ford Research and Engineering Center.
The array includes an integrated battery storage system and will be used to power newly installed electric vehicle chargers.
This can generate over 1,100 megawatt hours of clean energy.
We also continue to support the communities where we live and serve.
We were also recognized by Points of Light for the fourth consecutive year as one of the Civic 50.
This award highlights DTE as one of the top 50 community-minded companies nationwide and corporate citizenship.
We also launched a Tree Trim Academy to create 200 high-paying jobs in Detroit.
DTE has a need for Tree Trimmers, and the community has a need for good high-quality jobs.
It will also help us continue to improve electric liability as Trees account for over 70% of our customer outages.
On the investor front, we completed the spin of the midstream business.
Now DTE Midstream is a stand-alone company and DTE Energy is a predominantly pure-play utility with 90% of operating earnings coming from our utilities.
The transaction went very smoothly and was well received by all stakeholders.
We didn't miss a beat on a very strategic transaction and many said, we made it look easy.
We delivered a strong second quarter with earnings of $1.70 per share and we are raising our 2021 operating earnings guidance and continue to pay a strong dividend.
DTE is continuing to deliver successful operating results.
At DTE Electric, we made another significant step toward our goal of reducing carbon emissions as we retired River Rouge Power Plant in the second quarter.
For over 60 years, the River Rouge Power Plant delivered safe, reliable and affordable energy for community throughout, Southeast Michigan.
River Rouge is one of the three coal-fired power plants, DTE is retiring by the end of 2022, which is an integral part of our company's clean energy transformation.
We continue to look at ways to accelerate our coal fleet retirements and potentially file our updated IRP before September of 2023.
We continue to expand on our voluntary renewable program, which is exceeding our high expectations.
In the first quarter, we announced the commitment of new customers to MIGreenPower, including the State of Michigan, Bedrock and Trinity Health.
During the second quarter, we signed up a number of new large customers, including Detroit Diesel, which is now one of our largest voluntary renewable customers.
The program continues to grow at an impressive rate.
So far, we've reached 950 megawatts of voluntary renewable commitments with large business customers and approximately 35,000 residential customers.
We have an additional 400 megawatts in the very advanced stages of discussion for future customers.
MIGreenPower is one of the largest voluntary renewable programs in the nation and helps advance our work toward our net 0 carbon emission goal while helping our customers meet their decarbonization goals.
We have made progress with our expedited tree trimming program, which is greatly improving reliability for our customers and have received Michigan Public Service Commission approval to securitize the tree trimming costs along with costs associated with the River Rouge Power Plant retirement.
At DTE Gas, we are on track to achieve net 0 greenhouse gas emissions by 2050.
We began the second phase of construction on our major transmission renewal project in Northern Michigan in June.
The project includes the installation of a new pipeline as well as facility modification work which will reduce the risk of significant customer outages.
Project is on track to be in service by the first quarter of next year.
Last quarter, we announced our New CleanVision Natural Gas Balance program.
This program provides the opportunity for customers to purchase both carbon offsets and renewable natural gas.
We enable them to reduce their carbon footprint.
We are proud of how fast the program is growing.
Finally, we have over 3,000 customers subscribed, and we are looking forward to seeing it become as successful as our voluntary renewable program at DTE Electric.
On our Power and Industrial business, we continue to add new projects as we began construction on a new RNG facility, our large dairy farm in South Dakota.
This will be P&I's largest dairy RNG project to date.
Project will directly inject RNG into the Northern Natural Gas system for sale into the California transportation fuels market.
Facility is expected to be in service in the third quarter of 2022.
We are also in advanced discussions on several new industrial energy and RNG projects and we'll provide updates on these as they progress.
P&I was also recognized by the Association of Union Contractors with the 2020 Project of the Year Award for the Ford Dearborn cogeneration project.
Overall, I am extremely proud of the team's accomplishments year-to-date, and I'm looking forward to more successes in 2021 and beyond.
Now moving on to slide six.
As I said, we've had a very strong start to 2021.
We are raising our operating earnings guidance midpoint from $5.51 per share to $5.77 per share, moving our year-over-year growth and operating earnings per share guidance from 7.4% to a robust 12.5%.
We are able to use some of this favorability to position the company to continue to deliver in future years.
We mentioned in Q1, we were deep into planning for 2022 in a great level of detail.
With all of this work, we feel great about achieving a smooth 5% to 7% growth trajectory into 2022 and through the five-year plan.
You are not going to see any surprises from us in our growth rate in 2022 in spite of the area roll off [Phonetic] and the converts coming due.
90% of our future operating earnings will be from our two regulated utilities, where we have a large investment agenda with $17 billion of capital investment in our five-year plan, focused on clean energy and customer reliability.
Overall, we feel very confident with our performance in 2021 and our future operational and financial performance.
Dave, over to you.
Let me start on slide seven to review our second quarter financial results.
Total operating earnings for the quarter were $329 million.
This translates into $1.70 per share.
You can find a detailed breakdown of earnings per share by segment, including our reconciliation to GAAP reported earnings in the appendix.
I'll start the review at the top of the page with our utilities.
The second quarter was a really warm quarter for us here in Michigan.
In fact, it was the seventh warmest on record.
DTE Electric earnings were $238 million for the quarter, which was $19 million higher than the second quarter of 2020, primarily due to higher commercial sales, rate implementation and warmer weather offset by nonqualified benefit plan gains that we had in 2020.
As we mentioned in the first quarter call, we've taken steps to reduce the variability of these investments going forward.
Moving on to DTE Gas.
Operating earnings were $7 million, $4 million lower than the second quarter of last year.
The earnings decrease was driven primarily by the warmer weather in 2021, offset by new rates.
Let's keep moving to the Gas Storage and Pipelines business on the third row.
Operating earnings for GSP were $86 million.
This was $16 million higher than the second quarter of 2020, driven primarily by the LEAP pipeline going into service and strong earnings across the pipeline segment.
On the next row, you can see our Power and Industrial segment operating earnings were $34 million.
This is a $9 million increase from second quarter last year due to new RNG projects beginning operation.
On the next one, you can see our operating earnings at our Energy Trading business were $21 million, which is $16 million higher than second quarter earnings last year due primarily to strong performance in the gas portfolio.
Year-to-date through the second quarter, this positions us positive to our expectation and our original guidance for the year.
Finally, Corporate and Other was unfavorable $22 million quarter-over-quarter, primarily due to the timing of taxes and higher interest expense.
Overall, DTE earned $1.70 per share in the second quarter of 2021, which is $0.17 per share higher than 2020.
Moving on to slide eight.
Given the strong start to the year, we were able to use this favorability to position ourselves to continue to deliver for our customers and investors in future years.
And we are also increasing our 2021 operating earnings per share guidance midpoint $5.51 per share to $5.77 per share.
The increase in guidance is due primarily to warmer-than-normal weather, sustained continuous improvement, and uncollectible expense variability at DTE Electric, higher REF volumes at P&I, and stronger performance of energy trading due to the realization of gains from a small, long physical storage position during the extreme cold weather event in Texas in the first quarter.
In the third quarter, we are seeing additional sales upside for Electric compared to our plan and higher than planned REF volumes at P&I.
We are continuing to explore opportunities to support future years through our invest strategy and to support future customer affordability.
As you can see on the slide, there is no Gas Storage and Pipeline segment in our operating guidance for this year.
The GSP segment will be classified as discontinued operations starting in the third quarter.
We continue to focus on maintaining solid balance sheet metrics.
Due to our continued strong cash flows, DTE is targeting no equity issuances in 2021 and has minimal equity needs in our plan beyond the convertible equity units in 2022.
We have a strong investment-grade rating and targeted an FFO-to-debt ratio of 16%.
With the proceeds from the spin-off of DTM, we are retiring long-term parent debt of approximately $2.6 billion after debt breakage costs.
These were NPV-positive transaction and immediately earnings per share accretive as we were able to retire a higher interest rate debt to support our current plan and to deliver our 5% to 7% operating earnings per share growth rate.
We feel great about our second quarter accomplishments, and we are confident in achieving our increased 2021 guidance and continuing to deliver on our long-term 5% to 7% operating earnings per share growth rate.
Our utilities continue to focus on our infrastructure investment agenda specifically investments in clean generation and investments to improve reliability and the customer experience.
We continue to focus on maintaining solid balance sheet metrics and are targeting no equity issuances in 2021.
In closing, after executing a successful spin of our midstream business, DTE continues to be well positioned to deliver the premium, total shareholder returns that our investors have come to expect over the past decade with strong utility growth and a growing dividend.
