The fourth quarter showed once again that the global environment remains very dynamic, presenting new challenges that we've learned to turn into long-term opportunities.
Our top line momentum reached 10% or 9% organic in a constrained environment.
Institutional and specialty grew 19%; pest elimination 10%; and industrial remained strong, growing 8% in the quarter, and our new business and innovation pipelines remain really strong.
At the same time, COVID came back during the fall, especially in North America and in Europe.
As we all know, inflation kept rising substantially and still, top line gain momentum, including pricing, which accelerated to 4% as we exited the quarter.
This was required to compensate for significant incremental costs from supply constraints and much high inflation pressure on our raw material and freight costs, discussed by close to 20% in the fourth quarter, nearly double the rate we saw in the third.
And just being close to a total of $1 per share unfavorable impact for the full year with almost half of that in Q4 alone.
So once again, our team demonstrated our commitment to protect our customers' operations at all time and in any condition to ensure food, power, water, and healthcare supply are protected while we also keep enhancing our margins for the long run.
We now enter 2022 with confidence and well aware that the environment might change, but we will keep doing our very best to stay ahead.
We expect the global economy to remain strong even if not as a perfect straight line.
The exact timing for the end of COVID impact remains hard to predict, but we expect it to be mostly behind us by the middle of this year.
We also expect inflation to remain at a high level, at least for the first half of the year, while we expect it to ease during the second half, and we're getting ready for this, too.
We will keep driving growth by fueling the institutional recovery, which is going really well by generating strong new business by investing in our new growth engines like life sciences, data centers, or microelectronics.
And by making sure we remain one of the very best places to work for the most promising and diverse global talent.
We'll keep addressing inflation by further enhancing our productivity through digital automation as we've done over the past few years by leveraging high-margin innovation and naturally by accelerating our value pricing.
For the full year '22, we expect raw materials and freight costs to further increase with inflation remaining high before it eased during the second half of the year.
Our full year pricing expectation for '22 is expected to be in the 5 to 6% range, which combined with our steady productivity work is expected to get ahead of inflation dollar in the first half and enhanced margins in the second half of the year and certainly beyond as the Ecolab model has proven many times.
All these actions should lead to a strong '22 with strong top line and adjusted earnings growth in the low teens for the full year and a first quarter with very healthy sales growth and a flattish earnings per share as pricing keeps building fast.
Finally, as we've done throughout the pandemic and against major market disruptions, we will remain focused on the future.
For us, it's all about delivering long-term value to our customers and to our shareholders, while managing the short term.
Our mission of protecting people and the resources better to life is as important as it's ever been.
Our opportunity has never been larger as we chase a global market that's today greater than $150 billion and growing fast.
We have the confidence that we will look back on this period and truly feel we did the right things the right way by protecting our teams and our customers when they needed us the most and by protecting our company in ways that made Ecolab even stronger and more relevant.
As the infection prevention company, helping customers protect their customers and their businesses with Ecolab Science Certified.
And as the sustainability company, helping our customers progress on the net zero journey, all of which leading to strong top line and consistent, reliable double-digit earnings per share growth.
And ultimately, getting us back on our pre-COVID earnings trajectory.
That concludes our formal remarks.
As a final note, before we begin Q&A, we plan to hold our annual tour of our booth at the National Restaurant Association show in Chicago on Monday, May 23.
If you have any questions, please contact my office.
Operator, would you please begin the question-and-answer period?
