My discussions today focus on the fourth-quarter fiscal 2021 results.
We expect to file the 10-K with the SEC on or about October 14.
We continue to drive strong improvement in IDT's results during the fourth quarter, powered by growth at net2phone, NRS, and our Mobile Top-Up business.
Let's focus first on net2phone.
net2phone subscription revenue growth accelerated in the fourth quarter increasing 46% year over year.
Growth in our Latin America and U.S. and Canadian market was again very strong.
Our subscription revenue margin remained robust, increasing 10 basis points to 83.5%.
net2phone's strategic focus on midsized businesses, our multichannel go-to-market strategies, and deeply localized in-country offerings consistently generate gross margins and revenue growth metrics above UCaaS industry averages.
But really, the exceptional results at net2phone, are the collective efforts of the focused customer-centric group of people around the globe that is net2phone.
Customers in net2phone don't hear no very often.
If they want or need something to help them better communicate, we find a solution for them.
net2phone is becoming a big company, but we are not becoming the kind of big company that has different departments for large enterprises and a different department for small companies.
And we don't have SLAs that differ depending on what you pay us.
At net2phone, no matter whether you're running a large global enterprise from Texas or a five-person start-up in Brazil, you are going to get a truly localized custom-tailored communication solution with outstanding service and reliability.
Of course, we continue to work on the spinoff of net2phone.
We believe the financial and legal preparations will be substantially completed by calendar year end to enable a tax-free spin-off early in 2022 should our board authorize it.
Within our fintech segment, NRS revenue increased by 76% year over year, led by increased sales of merchant services and specifically NRS Pay payment processing.
Advertising and data sales at NRS were also robust in the fourth quarter.
At July 31, NRS had over 14,000 active terminals and over 5,600 payment processing accounts, more than double the number of accounts a year earlier.
Average revenue per terminal exclusive of terminal sales increased from $126 in the year-ago quarter to $169 in the fourth quarter of 2021.
We believe that ARPU will continue to climb with the addition of new NRS Pay accounts, increased utilization of our enormously powerful advertising network, and further utilization of data offerings by our consumer packaged goods partners just to name a few.
Also within our fintech segment, money transfer revenue decreased 49% compared to the year-ago quarter.
As we have discussed previously, a transitory foreign exchange market condition materially boosted revenue and gross profit in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 and persisted through the second quarter of fiscal 2021.
Absent that impact, fourth-quarter fiscal 2021 revenue would have increased by 36% compared to the year-ago quarter.
Sequentially, money transfer revenue increased by over 6%.
And finally, turning to our largest segment, Traditional Communications continue to exceed our expectations.
Traditional Communications revenue in the fourth quarter increased 10% year over year.
Within Traditional Communications, Mobile Top-Up revenue increased by 41%, powered by increases in sales in its B2B channel.
We expect that our efforts over the past year to expand our Mobile Top-Up business into the African market, led by the recent acquisition of a majority stake in a Mobile Top-Up operator with an extensive footprint in Africa, our increased focus in the B2B space, as well as the growing demand for data-heavy services worldwide, will continue to drive Mobile Top-Up revenue growth.
Fourth-quarter earnings per diluted share increased to $1.46 from $0.82 in the fourth quarter last year.
The increase reflects the positive impact of an income tax valuation allowance reversal in addition to the strong improvements in the underlying profitability of several of our business units.
Cash generation during the quarter helped to drive an increase in cash and current investments of $34 million during the quarter and $52 million during the fiscal year to $161 million as of July 31, and we have no debt.
Following the quarter close, our NRS business sold a 2.5% stake to a private investment fund for $10 million, implying a $400 million valuation for that business.
That was based on approximately 19 times NRS' trailing 12-month revenue at the end of our third quarter.
We have not only endured COVID's multi-faceted challenges, but over the past several quarters, we have built like many other companies across the country and across the globe with supply chain issues that impacted our inventories of phones, POS terminals, and other hardware.
Throughout, we have maintained our focus and succeeded in executing on our key objectives.
