I'm joined today on the call by Marcelo Fischer, IDT's chief financial officer.
IDT continued to deliver strong results, reflecting the sustained execution of our strategic priorities and the robust operating performances of our businesses.
As a result, our top and bottom lines increased appreciably compared to the year-ago and prior quarters.
Even though excluding the positive impacts of a reversal of income tax valuation allowances and gains on investments recorded this quarter, consolidated revenue increased $52 million year over year to $374 million with our fourth consecutive quarter of year-over-year revenue increases.
With solid performances across the board, including an exceptional increase in mobile top-up revenue among our traditional communications offerings, consolidated income from operations increased from $10.1 million to $13.9 million this quarter.
Our adjusted EBITDA less capex, which is overall a good proxy for cash generation, jumped to $13.2 million and $5.7 million.
Sorry, my kids have just joined me, I apologize.
I am sorry, it's the problem with not pre-recording.
I am just going to go back and drop, I apologize.
Consolidated income from operations increased $10.1 million to $13.9 million this quarter.
While adjusted EBITDA less capex, which is overall a good proxy for cash generation jumped to $13.2 million from $5.7 million.
All three of our reporting segments, net2phone-UCaaS, fintech, and traditional communications met or exceeded our expectations.
Our high growth, high margin businesses once again performed extremely well, net2phone delivered subscription revenue growth of 39% year-over-year.
The increase reflected in part for progress on the net2phone development roadmap, net2phone continues to add API third-party integrations and now offers integrations with Salesforce, Zoho, PurpleCloud, Slack, Zapier, and Microsoft Teams, among others.
Its growing integration toolkit enhances access to new segments across its domestic and international markets.
In our fintech segment, NRS accelerated its impressive revenue growth increasing revenue by over 120% year over year, led by payment processing and digital advertising services.
This quarter, NRS announced the partnership enabling our independent retailers to ship and receive commerce packages.
This deal illustrates the real strength of the NRS ecosystem, namely, its ability to generate revenue from a variety of services in ways that add tremendous value to our retailers.
Also, within fintech, our BOSS Revolution money transfer business remained strong, generating 63% revenue growth year over year after excluding the significant positive impact of the transient FX opportunities we successfully pursued starting with the year-ago quarter, but which finally and completely ceased in the second quarter of this year.
Our money transfer team has done a great job of enhancing the BOSS Revolution money app, user experience, and systematically cross-selling customers from our other BOSS offerings.
In the coming months, we will continue to grow our money transfer service to new corridors, enhance our distribution network, notably in Africa and expand it to new origination markets.
These initiatives offer abundant long-term growth potential.
And finally, within our largest segment, traditional communications, mobile top-up revenue jumped by $36 million sequentially and by $47 million year over year, underscoring the vigor of these offerings and the potential to sustain long-term cash generation.
This significant revenue increase reflects our recent efforts to grow our share in the mobile top-up space.
Powered by mobile top-up, adjusted EBITDA less capex for the traditional communication segment jumped to $20.8 million, an increase of $8.7 million from the year-ago quarter.
Finishing up our strong third-quarter operational results enabled us to further strengthen our balance sheet with a significant improvement to available cash and current ratios this quarter.
And I'm sure some of my kids would love to join, but hopefully, it will just be the two of us.
