Total revenues for the second quarter of fiscal 2021 of $143.6 million increased $29.8 million or 26% compared to $113.8 million in the same quarter last year.
Net earnings for the quarter were $11.9 million or $1.08 per diluted share compared to net earnings of $5.5 million or $0.51 per diluted share in the prior year.
Irrigation segment revenues for the second quarter of $118.6 million increased $25.1 million or 27% compared to the same quarter last year.
North America irrigation revenues of $80.2 million, increased $13.1 million or 19% compared to last year.
The increase resulted primarily from higher irrigation equipment sales volume and higher average selling prices.
This increase was partially offset by lower engineering services revenue of approximately $10.5 million related to a project in the prior year that did not repeat.
In the International Irrigation markets, revenues of $38.4 million increased $12 million or 45% compared to the same quarter last year.
The increase resulted from higher irrigation equipment sales volumes in several international markets.
The overall impact of foreign currency translation differences was insignificant for the quarter.
Total Irrigation segment operating income for the second quarter was $18 million, an increase of $7.9 million or 79% compared to the same quarter last year and operating margin improved to 15.2% of sales compared to 10.8% of sales in the prior year.
Improved margins were supported by higher irrigation equipment sales volume.
However, this improvement was tempered somewhat by the impact of higher raw material and freight costs.
As Randy mentioned in his comments, we have implemented multiple price increases to pass along the escalating costs.
However, we have experienced margin compression as we work through the backlog of orders received prior to the effective dates of our pricing actions.
We expect this margin pressure to continue into the third quarter, until increased cost pass-throughs are fully realized.
Feedback received from our dealers, indicates that Lindsay has consistently led the industry in proactively implementing price increases and other than timing differences, the pricing environment has remained rational.
Infrastructure segment revenues for the second quarter of $25 million, increased $4.7 million or 23% compared to the same quarter last year.
The increase resulted primarily from higher Road Zipper System sales and lease revenue, while global sales of road safety products were relatively flat compared to the prior year.
Infrastructure segment operating income for the second quarter was $6.3 million, an increase of $400,000 or 8% compared to the same quarter last year.
Infrastructure operating margin for the quarter was 25.4% of sales compared to 29% of sales in the prior year.
Positive margin mix from higher Road Zipper sales and lease revenue was partially offset by the negative impact of higher raw material and other costs.
In addition, the prior year included a gain of $1.2 million sale of a building that had been held for sale.
Turning to the balance sheet performance and liquidity.
During the quarter, we had capital expenditures of $11 million which included $8.5 million to exercise a purchase option for the land and buildings related to our manufacturing operation in Turkey.
This facility is well positioned strategically and geographically and the purchase provides us greater flexibility to take advantage of future growth opportunities in the EMEA region.
Our total available liquidity at the end of the second quarter was $180.3 million, with $130.3 million in cash and marketable securities and $50 million available under our revolving credit facility.
Our total debt was $116.3 million at the end of the second quarter, almost all of which matures in 2030.
Additionally, at the end of the quarter, we were well within the financial covenants of our borrowing facilities, including a gross debt-to-EBITDA leverage ratio of 1.4 compared to a covenant limit of 3.0.
