Joining me on the call today are Rob Goldstein, our chairman and chief executive officer; and Patrick Dumont, our president and chief operating officer.
Also joining us on the call today are Dr. Wilfred Wong, president of Sands China; and Grant Chum, chief operating officer of Sands China.
In addition, we may discuss non-GAAP measures.
Please note that we have posted supplementary earnings slides on our Investor Relations website.
We may refer to those slides during the Q&A portion of the call.
Just some brief comments, and we'll go right to Q&A.
Our results continue to reflect the pandemic's impact.
We did generate positive EBITDA of $244 million per quarter, about the same as the first quarter.
Our Macao performance reflected sequential improvement, but pandemic-related travel restrictions continue to impact our performance.
We do remain confident in the eventual recovery in both Macao and Singapore, and we cannot define the timing of the full recovery that's underway and will continue in 2021.
Singapore remains in the $500 million to $600 million range annually, although the second quarter was impacted by heightened pandemic-related restrictions for a portion of the quarter.
We will also be subject to closures of both portions of MBS from today through August 5 as part of COVID-19-related protocols.
This will obviously have a negative impact on Q3 results.
And as if, there remains no visibility as to when air traffic will return in Singapore, unless Macao, it is difficult to project additional EBITDA from MBS until the resumption of air travel.
Our considerable investments in Macao continues to take shape as the market recovers Four Seasons and Londoner will present growth opportunities, and we continue to have the largest footprint in this incredible market.
China continues to demonstrate economic resilience.
The spending in Macao's very strong at the premium mass level from both a gaming and retail perspective.
You may want to reference Pages 29 and 30 in your deck.
We do have great optimism about our ability to form to pre-pandemic levels once the vacation returns.
Our company is dividing the three areas, the Asian portfolio in Macao and Singapore.
While we believe Macao will accelerate in the second half of this year and lead recovery, Singapore will follow up on the resumption of air travel.
We are confident we'll return to a $5 billion plus EBITDA from Asia in the future.
The sale of the Las Vegas assets create liquidity and vast optionality to explore large land-based destination resorts in United States and Asia.
And finally, in the early innings of building out our digital presence, we are exploring multiple opportunities at present.
And we are eager to have this effort become entailed to our company in the years ahead.
We'll update you at the appropriate time.
Let's take some questions.
