This is Kasey Jenkins, Vice President of McCormick Investor Relations.
We'll begin with remarks from Lawrence Kurzius, Chairman, President and CEO; and Mike Smith, Executive Vice President and CFO.
During our remarks, we will refer to certain non-GAAP financial measures.
These include information in constant currency as well as adjusted gross margin, adjusted operating income, adjusted income tax rate and adjusted earnings per share that exclude the impact of special charges, transaction and integration expenses related to the acquisitions of Cholula and FONA.
In our comments, certain percentages are rounded.
Actual results could differ materially from those projected.
It is important to note, these statements include expectations and assumptions which will be shared related to the impact of COVID-19 pandemic.
It is now my pleasure to turn the discussion over to Lawrence.
Starting on slide 4.
Our first quarter results were outstanding.
As we said in our year-end earnings call in January, we have confidence in our strategies and are well positioned to deliver another year of differentiated growth in 2021.
Following an extraordinary year in 2020, in 2021 we expect strong underlying base business performance and recent acquisitions to drive significant sales growth as well as strong operating income growth, even considering extraordinary COVID-19 cost and business transformation investments highlighting our focus on profit realization.
During the first quarter, we delivered double-digit sales, adjusted operating income and earnings growth.
We expect growth to vary by quarter in 2021 given 2020's level of demand volatility and the pace of COVID-19 recovery.
But importantly, we have started the year with outstanding first quarter performance, giving us confidence in an even stronger outlook for 2021.
As seen on slide 5, we have a broad and advantaged global flavor portfolio with compelling offerings for every retail and customer strategy across all channels.
The breadth and reach of our portfolio across segments, geographies, channels, customers and product offerings creates a balanced and diversified portfolio to drive consistency in our performance, as evidenced again by our first quarter results.
The sustained shift in consumer behavior to cooking and eating more at home continued to drive substantial increases in our Consumer segment demand in all regions as well as increases in our packaged food company customers in our Flavor Solutions segment.
On the other hand, in our Americas and EMEA regions, we continued to experience reduced demand from our restaurant and other foodservice customers given the pressure on away-from-home consumption driven by continued COVID-19 government imposed restrictions which in several areas increased during the first quarter.
Notably, our APZ region had substantial growth in both segments, driven not only by lapping the significant disruption last year caused by the COVID-19 related lockdown in China, but also by the sustained increase in at-home consumption and an increase in away from home consumption as restrictions have eased and the recovery momentum is building.
Finally, with the addition of our Cholula and FONA acquisitions, we have further extended the reach and breadth of our portfolios, with new product offerings, channels and customers and are excited about their contributions to our first quarter and beyond.
These impacts continue to demonstrate the strength and diversity of our offering, and we are confident our balanced portfolio will continue to differentiate McCormick and sustainably position us for growth.
After that, Mike will go more in depth on our first quarter results and provide an update on our 2021 guidance.
Starting with our outstanding first quarter results, as seen on slide 6.
Total sales grew 22%, including a 2% favorable impact from currency.
In constant currency, we grew total sales 20%, with increases in both segments.
Base business growth, new products and acquisitions, our three long-term growth drivers, all contributed to the increase.
In addition to our top line growth, adjusted operating income increased 35%, including a 3% favorable impact from currency, and adjusted operating margin expanded by 160 basis points.
Growth from higher sales, favorable mix and CCI-led cost savings more than offset COVID-19 related costs and higher planned brand marketing investments.
Our first quarter adjusted earnings per share was $0.72 compared to $0.54 in the prior year, driven by our strong operating performance, partially offset by a higher adjusted tax rate.
Turning to our first quarter segment business performance.
Starting on slide 7.
In our Consumer segment, we grew sales by 35%; on constant currency, 32%, with double-digit increases across each of our three regions.
Our Americas constant currency sales growth was 30% in the first quarter, with incremental sales from our Cholula acquisition contributing 5%.
The momentum Cholula carried in from last year continues to be strong, with consumption growing at twice the category rate.
Excluding Cholula, our total McCormick US branded portfolio, as indicated in our IRI consumption data and combined with unmeasured channels, grew 15%, which reflects the strength of our categories as consumers continued to cook more at home.
For the first time in several quarters, our sales increase was higher than our US IRI consumption growth.
We are realizing the benefit of our capacity expansion at the end of last year.
The difference between shipments and consumption is attributable to beginning to catch up on the undershipment of consumption across all quarters of last year that resulted in depleted retailer and consumer pantry inventories.
Demand has remained high as the steps we've taken to increase supply are beginning to show.
As we mentioned in our January earnings call, after experiencing real pressure on our US manufacturing operations throughout 2020 due to elevated demand levels, we ended the calendar year with considerable incremental capacity and restoration plans for products which had been suspended.
Throughout our first quarter, we removed products from suspension and continued to see service levels improve, which, combined with our overshipping consumption, indicates we are beginning to rebuild the inventory pipeline.
As we've said previously, inventory replenishment will progress throughout the year.
We continue to work with all our customers on improving shelf conditions and estimate more than half the suspended products are now back on shelf.
The level of restoration is very customer specific.
Focusing further on our US branded portfolios.
In spice and seasonings and all other categories, excluding dry recipe mixes, we grew first quarter consumption at double-digit rates and again increased our household penetration and repeat buy rates.
In the first quarter, we continued to gain share in categories less impacted by supply constraints, including snacks and broths, barbecue sauce, wet marinates and Asian products.
The categories most impacted affected by supply constraints, spice and seasonings and dry recipe mix, we know there is a high correlation between our share performance and the shelf conditions resulting from product suspension or allocation.
Products that have had strong supply and remained on shelf have performed well, and as suspended products are restocked on shelf, we're seeing similar performance.
We anticipate regaining share as conditions continue to improve.
All of our key categories continued to outpace the center of store growth rates favorably impacting not only the McCormick brand, but smaller brands as well such as Stubb's, Lawry's, Simply Asia, Thai Kitchen, Zatarain's and Kitchen Basics.
And in e-commerce, we had strong double-digit pure-play growth, with McCormick branded consumption outpacing all major categories.
We continue to use our strong category management capabilities in working with our customers as inventory is replenished throughout the supply chain to optimize category shelf sets, drive both growth for our customers and for McCormick.
We are well positioned for success in 2021 and have implemented efficient long-term solutions and strengthened our supply chain resiliency to support continued growth.
Now turning to EMEA, which continued its momentum with outstanding performance in the first quarter.
Our constant currency sales rose 26%, with broad-based growth across the region.
Each of our markets drove double-digit total branded consumption growth, with market share gains across the region.
Spices and seasonings consumption was strong in all markets, driving market share gains across total EMEA region.
And our Vahine brand in France again had strong consumption growth and outpaced the homemade desserts category.
In the UK, both Frank's RedHot and French's Mustard also had strong consumption and gained share.
Since the beginning of the pandemic, our EMEA supply chain has been very well positioned to meet the elevated demand and this has contributed to our ability to grow share across the region.
In EMEA, our household penetration and rate of repeat buyer increased again in the first quarter for the fourth consecutive quarter across our major brands and markets compared to last year, and we continue to work closely with our customers to ensure that elevated consumer demand will be met, even obtaining incremental placement for our branded portfolio as other manufacturers and private label faced supply challenges.
We're excited with our growth trajectory in EMEA following challenging market conditions in the past.
In the Asia-Pacific region, our constant currency sales grew 55%.
During the first quarter of last year, China's consumption was disrupted by the COVID-19 related lockdown.
Recovering from that disruption increased sales in the first quarter of 2021 versus last year.
Notwithstanding that recovery, the region still had double-digit growth, driven by strong China consumer and branded foodservice demand, partially fueled by the Chinese New Year holiday as well as strong consumer consumption in the rest of the region.
For instance, in Australia, we continued to see elevated consumption in the brands where we gained household penetration last year such as Frank's RedHot, Gourmet Garden and Grill Mates.
Across all regions, we know second quarter consumption will start to be compared to the highly elevated levels from last year.
And while we do not expect consumption at those same levels, we do expect continued and long-lasting growth from the increase in consumers' cooking more at home.
Constant currency sales in our Flavor Solutions segment grew 3%, driven by our Americas and APZ regions.
In the Americas, we drove constant currency sales growth of 2%, driven by our FONA and Cholula acquisitions as well as growth with our consumer packaged food customers or our at-home base.
With strengthened base business as well as new product momentum, we continued to shift our portfolio to more value-added and technically insulated products, not only with the combination of FONA's flavor portfolio, but also with considerable growth from snack seasonings in the US and Mexico as well as flavors from both savory and beverage applications.
Demand from our away from home customer base, the branded foodservice and restaurant customers declined and continue to be impacted by the COVID-19 environment.
Sales in our EMEA region were comparable to the first quarter of last year for Flavor Solutions, with demand declines in our away from home customer base, offset by strong sales for our consumer packaged food customers.
This growth was driven by a significant increase in new product growth versus last year as well as continued strength in the base business, partially from our customers' promotional activities.
Our sales growth in the Asia Pacific region was outstanding, up 18% in constant currencies.
Both China, excluding the recovery impact from last year's lockdown, and Australia delivered double-digit growth from quick service restaurants or QSR customers.
This growth was driven by significant momentum in limited time offers as well as strength in the core business.
I mentioned our results related to Cholula and FONA.
And now I'd like to provide a brief update on their integration status.
, For both acquisitions, our integration activities are progressing according to our plan.
We continue to deliver on opportunities quickly and aggressively to drive growth and are pleased with our momentum on capturing our synergy opportunities.
We remain on track to achieve synergies according to plan.
As expected, our integration of the business has been straightforward.
As of March 1, all functions have been integrated into our McCormick processes, and importantly, we are now servicing customers from our McCormick US distribution center.
From a consumer commercial perspective, we are expanding distribution and are fueling growth, with robust brand marketing investments.
We'll be activating both digital, where Cholula was underpenetrated, and in-store merchandising in the next few weeks for our exciting Cinco de Mayo campaign.
In Flavor Solutions, we're also expanding distribution with new and existing branded foodservice customers and are leveraging Cholula's authentic Mexican flavor for increased menu participation, particularly in Cinco de Mayo menu offers.
The employees of FONA have been part of building a great business, and we are excited to be working with them to collectively integrate the business and drive plans to capitalize on growth opportunities.
Our functional integration is very much on track and is using a best of both approach to ensure we optimize our operating model, similar to the approach we have with our RB Foods integration.
The alignment of our organization is well under way, and we have had significant commercial collaboration yielding quick wins and identifying long-term strategic opportunities.
Customer reaction has been extremely positive.
They were impressed with our early collaboration and excited about the increased customer value proposition created by the combination of McCormick and FONA, a more comprehensive product offering, broader technical platform, deep technical and flavor talent and best-in-class customer collaborations.
And we were excited with FONA's performance starting the year, with great results and a robust momentum across the business.
For both Cholula and FONA, we are pleased with our progress so far and our contribution to our results.
Our enthusiasm for these acquisitions and our confidence that we will deliver on our acquisition plans, accelerate growth of these portfolios and drive shareholder value has only increased over the last few months.
Now I would like to briefly comment on the conditions we're seeing in our markets, their potential impact and our 2021 organic growth plans, starting on slide 10.
Local demand for flavor remains the foundation for our sales growth.
We are capitalizing on the growing consumer interest in healthy flavorful cooking, trusted brands as well as digital engagement and purpose-minded practices.
These long-term trends have only accelerated during the pandemic, and our alignment, combined with the breadth and reach of our portfolio, sustainably positions us for continued growth.
These underlying trends, current market conditions and our robust 2021 plans position us well to successfully execute on our growth strategies in both segments.
Turning to slide 11.
Starting with our Consumer segment, around the world, we continue to experience sustained elevated consumer demand, which is real incremental consumption and reflects the trend of consumers cooking more at home.
Across our APZ region, consumer demand continues to be strong.
In China, consumer consumption remains strong, and we continue to see recovery in foodservice, which, in China, is in our Consumer segment, with approximately 90% of restaurants open during the Chinese New Year period.
In Australia, even with restaurant restrictions eased and away from home demand increasing, at-home consumption has remained elevated.
And as I mentioned earlier, we are retaining households that came into our brands last year.
And we're also realizing growth with our away from home customer.
In many of our largest markets in EMEA, restrictive COVID-19 measures are still in place, further fueling at-home consumption, and we are seeing sustained levels of demand.
In the Americas, as restrictions are easing and vaccinations are continuing, consumption remains elevated.
Consumers are continuing to come to our brand, having a good experience and buying our products again.
Consumers are cooking more from scratch and adding flavor to their meal occasions is a key long-term trend which has accelerated during the pandemic.
As we've shared previously, our proprietary consumer survey data, supported by external research indicates consumers are enjoying the cooking experience as it provides a creative outlook, reduces stress and connects the family.
And consumers feel meals prepared at home are safer, healthier, better tasting and cost less.
In our recent consumer survey from February, these positive sentiments are not only still true but have strengthened.
Consumers' interest in cooking has increased in recent months versus the end of last year because they want to cook versus have to cook.
For example, approximately 50% of the consumers surveyed indicated they are cooking more now because they want to try new recipe, ingredient, cooking method or tool or simply just cook from scratch, and approximately 40% also indicated they're trying to recreate restaurant meals at home.
Importantly, over two-thirds of consumers surveyed claim they would maintain or increase their current level of cooking at home even if life were to return to normal next week, whatever normal may be.
We continue to believe that consumer behavior and sentiment driving an increased and sustained preference for cooking at home will continue globally and persist beyond the pandemic, further driving consumer demand for our products in 2021 and beyond, fueled by robust brand marketing, differentiated new products and our strong category management initiatives.
Our category management initiatives are designed to continue to strengthen our category leadership by driving growth for both us and our customers.
In the US, in 2020 we began our initiative to reinvent the in-store experience for spices and seasonings consumers by introducing new merchandising elements to improve navigation and drive inspiration, transforming and at times confusing shelves with three shoppable sections.
Our rollout has continued in 2021, with plans to implement in thousands of stores, and the early indication is positive, with the category and McCormick branded growth outpacing the rest of the market in transformed stores.
We are also investing in e-commerce to drive McCormick and category growth.
In the first quarter, we delivered over 90% global e-commerce growth, with particular strength in omnichannel.
We are investing in content, retail research and innovation specifically for e-commerce, trialing new items of packaging in the direct-to-consumer channel first.
For example, in the Americas we've launched unique flavor inspiration products such as Frank's RedHot Everything Bagel Seasonings, and in China we are launching a ready to eat chili paste on our direct to consumer platform.
In EMEA, following the successful launch of the innovative street food seasonings the last year, we are now accelerating online growth with variety, bundle packs and multi-buy offers on our main e-commerce channels.
Turning to global brand marketing.
We continue to increase our investments across our entire portfolio as evident in our 17% increase in the first quarter and plan for another significant increase in the second quarter.
Our investments have proven to be effective, and we will continue to connect with consumers online, turning real-time insights into actions by targeting messaging focused on providing information and inspiration.
We expect our brand marketing investments, combined with the valuable brand equities and strong digital consumer engagement will continue to drive growth with existing consumers and the millions of consumers gained in 2020.
Highlighting some of our first quarter investments in the Americas and EMEA regions on slide 12.
Starting with the Americas.
We continued our advertising campaign, It's Gonna Be Great, with a focus on consumers' continuing traditions and preparing the families' signature holiday dishes even if their celebrations look different.
Our Frank's Super Bowl campaign integrated across digital, social, online, video and TV featured fan favorite Eli Manning promoting Frank's RedHot as approachably hot and was our best Super Bowl campaign yet garnering record high impressions.
As part of our Zatarain's Bold Like That campaign, we partnered with New Orleanian author and poet Cleo Wade to promote virtual Mardi Gras celebrations with authentic New Orleans flavors, #Zatarain'sPorchParty, and recognizing virtual celebrations replace live Mardi Gras events, we supported Culture Aid NOLA, an organization which distributes food to hospitality workers impacted by pandemic restrictions.
Turning to EMEA, where we have invested a substantial portion of our brands' marketing, our digital marketing and promotional activities included our holiday campaign featuring a festive gold cap limited edition packaging which drove strong holiday results in our major markets.
In the UK, with our New Year flavor resolutions campaign, we inspired consumers with recipes and products to flavor their healthy kick, whether it be through the heat of Frank's or spicing it up through Schwartz.
And in France, we're giving families another reason to celebrate in 2021.
In 2020, birthday celebrations were not just a piece of cake.
So with the inspiration of our Half-py Birthday marketing campaign, consumers can celebrate their half birthdays, complete with Vahine's launch of a decimal comma-shaped candle to top their cakes made with our Vahine baking products.
Looking at just a few of our second quarter plans, in the Americas we'll inspire restaurant quality cooking with our It's Gonna Be Great campaign.
Our Vahine brand in EMEA is sponsoring a prime-time French baking program which will showcase our homemade dessert line.
In both regions, we launched Easter campaigns, bringing the family together with baking and crafting ideas.
Finally, our plans include support of our robust new product launches.
New products are integral to our growth.
In our Consumer segment, new product innovation differentiates our brands and strengthens our relevance with our consumers.
Our 2020 launches have made exceptional trials and are providing significant momentum into this year.
And in 2021, we have a robust global pipeline of new product launches, and I'm happy to share some of our first half launches as seen on slide 13.
We're meeting consumers at the intersection of flavor and health.
We're launching Just 5 dry recipe mixes in the US, dips and dressing mixes in flavors like French onions and Homestyle Ranch, the clean and short ingredient statements, five simple ingredients delivering a classic flavor experience.
And in France, we are expanding our range of organic products in our Vahine homemade dessert line.
When it comes to heat, we're continuing to broaden our French portfolio globally.
In the US, we're expanding French green sauces, with a milder tangy Buffalo flavor and a garlic Buffalo flavor or combining savory garlic with spicy eats.
Also in the US, we have just launched Cholula wing sauces in two flavors: Mexicali Cilantro Lime and Caliente Spicy Arbol Peppers in a unique bottle with the iconic wooden cap.
And in the UK, we're launching Frank's craft additions, capitalizing on interest in Frank's heat with differentiated flavors such as roasted Jalapeno and raw [Phonetic] Habanero.
We are responding to consumers' demand for convenience and flavor.
In the US, our launch of frozen appetizers, providing hot chicken bites and Buffalo chicken dips with Frank's flavor that are ready in minutes is gaining momentum with one of our best new product starts.
We're excited at the launch of new Grill Mates all-purpose grilling seasonings for consumers who want to respect the need.
Simple course ground seasonings for the open flame that cling to the meat and lock in juiciness.
Finally, our innovation is not only all about flavor but also staying relevant with our consumers through our packaging innovation.
We're continuing the rollout of our first choice bottle with its consumer preferred transparent and functional design, modern look and a reinforcement of fresh flavor into our Eastern European markets.
These markets have predominantly been sachet markets for spices and seasonings and perceive the bottle packaging as a premium offering.
And in Canada, we're beginning the relaunch of our gourmet line in the First Choice bottle as well as adding new flavor varieties.
In the UK, not only are we building on our Schwartz recipe mix momentum with the introduction of flavorful line extensions.
We're also advancing on our sustainable packaging commitment with sachet packaging that is 100% recyclable.
Schwartz will be the first brand in the UK dry recipe mix category with recyclable packaging.
And in France, with the redesign of our Ducros grinder.
Its appearance not only has greater consumer appeal, but it also reduces our carbon footprint.
Turning to Flavor Solutions.
In this segment, we have a diverse customer base, and have seen various stages of recovery.
From a food at home perspective, our Flavor Solutions' growth varies by packaged food customer.
Overall, we are carrying our growth momentum with these customers into 2021, driven by strength in their iconic core products as well as new products and bigger-bet innovation in 2021.
Overall, the sell-in of our new product launches and big bet innovations from these customers slowed in 2020 due to the focus on keeping core items on shelf.
There are still new product launches, and in many cases they are smaller expansions of the core and more channel oriented.
Moving into 2021, we're excited about the momentum of the 2020 launches, but even more excited about the robust 2021 pipeline.
Our customers have bigger bet innovations in their plans.
I would look forward to collaborating with them and driving growth from those launches.
The key enablers driving our success and developing winning flavors for our customers is our insight on consumer and culinary trends.
We've been at the forefront forecasting emerging flavors for 21 years.
Through the McCormick flavor forecasts, we have a history of identifying the top trends in ingredients, catering to future of flavor, many of which have stood the test of time, whether it was Ma Turmeric or pumpkin pie spices, the flavor of Chipotle or dishes with [Indecipherable].
In April, we'll be launching our newest addition that will shake up the way we cook, flavor and eat.
We'll feature new trends, flavors and recipes that will not only flavor our Consumer segment innovation, but also drive wins with our Flavor Solutions' customer.
In our away from home portion of this segment, as I mentioned earlier, we are seeing growth from our restaurant and other foodservice customers in our APZ region as restrictions have eased.
The QSR demand momentum continues to strengthen, particularly as they continue to expand their menu options with limited time offers and are increasing promotional activities.
Branded foodservice demand as it relates to entertainment, stadium for hospitality venues, for instance, is recovering at a slower pace.
In EMEA and the Americas, during the first quarter our restaurants and other foodservice customers were still impacted by government imposed COVID-19 restrictions in many markets.
There is now optimism with many of these customers related to restrictions' easing and reopening plans.
Focus has shifted from adapting operating model to the supply chain preparedness for the second half of the year.
We're collaborating with our customers to ensure a strong recovery with pent-up demand being met.
We expect the recovery of some of our branded food customers will start to begin, similar to what we've seen in APZ.
As QSR customers are oriented less to dine-in, their recovery will be at a faster pace than the rest of the restaurant and foodservice industry.
We have positive fundamentals in place to navigate through this period and are excited about the recovery momentum.
Across our entire Flavor Solutions portfolio, we were advantaged by our differentiated customer engagement and plan on driving further wins for both us and our customers in fiscal 2021.
With our customer intimacy approach, we will continue to drive new product wins, collaborate on opportunities and solutions, manage through recovery plans and, importantly, further strengthen our customer partnerships.
When we collaborate with our customers and our technical innovation center, we have a high win rate.
Since we could not connect in person during 2020, we adapted to new ways of collaborating through creative, digital and virtual solutions.
The interactive experience for our customers build their excitement, awareness and confidence in our unique capabilities in an engaging and inspiring way.
We continue to not only strengthen our engagement in 2020, but we also proved we could maintain a high win rate whether physically in our innovation centers or not, and have carried that momentum into 2021.
In our Flavor Solutions segment, the execution of our strategy to migrate our portfolio to more technically insulated and value-added categories will continue in 2021.
The top-line opportunities gained from our investments to expand flavor scale, our momentum in flavor categories as well as opportunities from our FONA acquisition, we expect to realize further results from this strategy.
Lastly, we continue to be recognized for our efforts for doing what's right for people, communities and the planet, our purpose-led performance.
Following being named by Corporate Knights in their 2021 Global 100 Most Sustainable Corporations Index as number one in the packaged food and processed foods and ingredients sector, McCormick was also recently named to Barron's 2021 100 Most Sustainable Companies list for the fourth consecutive year.
As we continue our sustainability journey, I'm excited to announce that later this week we will begin using 100% renewable electricity in all our Maryland and New Jersey-based facilities.
This includes our manufacturing operations, distribution centers, offices and technical innovation center and will result in an 11% reduction in our global greenhouse gas emissions.
Moving to slide 16.
In summary, we continue to capture the momentum we have gained in our Consumer segment and with our Flavor Solutions' at home customers, have positive fundamentals in place to navigate through the Flavor Solutions away from home recovery and are excited about our Cholula and FONA acquisitions, all of which bolster our confidence for continued growth in 2021.
Our fundamentals, momentum and growth outlook are stronger than ever.
Our achievements in 2020, our effective strategies, our robust operating momentum and the breadth and reach of our portfolio reinforce our confidence in delivering another strong year of growth and performance in 2021.
Following an extraordinary year in 2020, our 2021 outlook reflects both our strong underlying base business performance and acquisitions driving significant sales growth as well as strong operating income growth, even considering extraordinary COVID-19 costs and our business transformation investments which highlights our focus on profit realization.
Our top-tier long-term growth objectives remain unchanged and we're positioned for continued success.
I'll now provide some additional comments on our first quarter performance and an update on our 2021 outlook.
As Lawrence mentioned, our first quarter results were outstanding.
Starting with our top line growth.
As seen on slide 18, we grew sales 20% in constant currency during the first quarter.
Our volume and product mix, acquisitions and pricing each contributed to the increase.
Our organic sales growth was 16%, driven by our Consumer segment, and incremental sales from our Cholula and FONA acquisitions contributed 4% across both segments.
The Consumer segment sales grew 32% in constant currency, with double-digit growth in all three regions.
The sustained shift in consumer consumption continues to drive increased demand for our consumer product, fueled by our brand marketing, new products and category management initiatives and resulted in higher volume and mix in each region.
On slide 19, Consumer segment sales in the Americas increased 30% in constant currency versus the first quarter of 2020, with 5% of the increase from the acquisition of Cholula.
The remaining increase from higher volume and product mix was broad based across majority of categories and brands as well as private label products, with particular strength in the McCormick, Frank's RedHot, French's, Zatarain's, Lawry's, Simply Asia and Gourmet Garden brands.
In EMEA, constant currency Consumer sales grew 26% from a year ago, with double-digit growth in all countries and categories across the region.
The most significant volume and mix growth drivers were Schwartz and Ducros branded spices and seasonings.
Vahine homemade dessert products, packing products and our Kamis branded products in Poland.
Consumer sales in the Asia Pacific region increased 55% in constant currency, driven primarily by the recovery from the disruption in China consumption last year, as Lawrence mentioned.
Excluding that recovery impact, the region had double-digit growth due to strong China consumer and branded foodservice demand, partially driven by the timing of Chinese New Year and related holiday promotions as well as continued strength in Australia.
Turning to our Flavor Solutions segment on slide 22.
We grew first quarter constant currency sales 3%.
In the Americas, Flavor Solutions constant currency sales grew 2%, driven by the FONA and Cholula acquisitions, a 7% increase, as well as pricing to offset cost increases.
Volume and product mix declined due to a reduction in demand from branded foodservice and other restaurant customers, partially offset by higher demand from packaged food companies, with particular strength in snack seasonings and savory flavors.
In EMEA, constant currency sales were comparable to last year as pricing actions offset cost increases.
Volume and product mix declined due to lower sales to branded foodservice and other restaurant customers, partially offset by sales growth with packaged food companies, with strength in snack seasonings.
In the Asia Pacific region, Flavor Solutions sales rose 18% in constant currency, driven by higher sales to QSRs in China and Australia, partially due to our customers' limited time offers and promotional activities as well as the China recovery impact from last year's COVID-19 related lockdown.
As seen on slide 26, adjusted operating income, which excludes transaction and integration costs related to the Cholula and FONA acquisitions as well as special charges, increased 35% or, in constant currency, 32%, in the first quarter versus the year ago period.
The Consumer segment adjusted operating income grew 59% to $190 million.
The 54% constant currency growth from higher sales, favorable mix and CCI-led cost savings more than offset COVID-19 related costs and a 17% increase in brand marketing.
In the Flavor Solutions segment, adjusted operating income declined 4% to $73 million with minimal impact from currency.
Higher sales and CCI-led cost savings were more than offset by unfavorable manufacturing costs.
As seen on slide 27, adjusted gross profit margin expanded 60 basis points in the first quarter versus the year ago period due to favorable mix, both within the Consumer segment and due to the sales shift between segments.
In addition, CCI-led cost savings were partially offset by COVID-19 related costs.
Our selling, general and administrative expense as a percentage of net sales was down year-on-year by 100 basis points from the first quarter of last year.
Leverage from sales growth drove the decline, partially offset by the increase in brand marketing I mentioned a moment ago.
With the gross margin expansion and SG&A leverage, adjusted operating margin expanded 160 basis points from the first quarter of 2020.
Turning to income taxes on slide 28.
Our first quarter adjusted effective tax rate was 22.7% compared to 18.4% in the year ago period.
The first quarter adjusted tax rate in 2020 was significantly impacted by a favorable discrete item related to a refinement of our entity structure.
Income from unconsolidated operations increased 28% in the first quarter of 2021 due to strong underlying performance of our joint venture in Mexico.
At the bottom line, as shown on slide 30, first quarter 2021 adjusted earnings per share were $0.72 as compared to $0.54 for the year-ago period.
The increase was due to our higher adjusted operating income performance, partially offset by a higher adjusted income tax rate.
On slide 31, we summarize highlights for cash flow and the balance sheet.
Our cash flow from operations was an outflow of $32 million for the first quarter of 2021 compared to an inflow of $45 million in the first quarter of 2020.
This change was primarily due to a lower level of cash generated from working capital associated with increased sales, higher incentive compensation payments and the payment of transaction and integration costs related to our recent acquisitions.
In February, we raised $1 billion through the issuance of five year 0.9% notes and 10 year 1.85% notes.
We took the opportunity in a low interest rate environment to optimize our long-term financing following our Cholula and FONA acquisitions.
We also returned $91 million of cash to our shareholders through dividends and used $49 million for capital expenditures this quarter.
We expect 2021 to be another year of strong cash flow, driven by profit and working capital initiatives, and our priority is to continue to have a balanced use of cash: funding investments to fuel growth, returning a significant portion to our shareholders through dividends and paying down debt.
Now I would like to discuss our 2021 financial outlook on slides 32 and 33.
With our broad and advantaged flavor portfolio and robust operating momentum and effective growth strategies, we are well positioned for another year of differentiated growth and performance.
In our 2021 outlook, we are projecting top line and earnings growth from our strong base business and acquisition contribution, with earnings growth partially offset by incremental COVID-19 costs and ERP investments as well as a higher projected adjusted effective tax rate.
We also expect there will be an estimated 2 percentage point favorable impact of currency rates on sales, adjusted operating income and adjusted earnings per share.
At the top line, due to our first quarter results and robust operating momentum, we are increasing our expected constant currency sales growth to 6% to 8% compared to 5% to 7% previously, which continues to include the incremental impact of the Cholula and FONA acquisitions at the projected range of 3.5% to 4%.
We anticipate our organic growth will be primarily led by higher volume and product mix, driven by our category management, brand marketing, new products and customer engagement growth plans.
As Lawrence mentioned earlier, we expect sales growth to vary by region and quarter in 2021, given 2020's level of demand volatility and the pace of the COVID-19 recovery, but importantly, we continue to expect we will drive overall organic sales growth with the full year in both of our segments.
We're now projecting our 2021 adjusted gross profit margin to be comparable to 2020 due to increasing inflationary pressure, mainly due to transportation costs.
But our inflation expectation for the full year remains a low single-digit increase.
Our adjusted gross margin projection reflects margin accretion from the Cholula and FONA acquisitions as well as unfavorable sales mix in both segments and COVID-19 costs.
Our estimate for COVID-19 costs remains unchanged at $60 million in 2021 as compared to $50 million in 2020 and weighted to the first half of the year.
As a reminder, fiscal 2021's COVID-19 costs are largely from third-party manufacturing costs.
Reflecting the increase in our sales outlook, we are also increasing our expected constant currency adjusted operating income growth.
Our adjusted operating income growth rate reflects expected strong underlying performance from our base business and acquisitions projected to be 11% to 13% constant currency growth compared to 10% to 12% previously.
This is partially offset by a 1% impact from increased COVID-19 costs compared to 2020 and a 3% impact of the estimated incremental ERP investment.
This results in total projected adjusted operating income growth rate of 7% to 9% in constant currency, increase from 6% to 8% previously.
This projection reflects the inflationary pressure I just mentioned as well as our CCI-led cost savings target of approximately $110 million.
We also continue to expect a low single-digit increase in brand marketing investments, which will be heavier in first half of the year.
We also reaffirm our 2021 adjusted effective income tax rate projected to be approximately 23%.
This outlook versus our 2020 adjusted effective tax rate is expected to be a headwind to our 2021 adjusted earnings-per-share growth of approximately 4%.
We are increasing our 2021 adjusted earnings per share expectations to growth of 5% to 7%, which includes a favorable impact from currency.
This increase reflects our higher adjusted operating profit outlook and the impact from optimizing our long-term financing, which I mentioned earlier.
Our guidance range for the adjusted earnings per share in 2021 is now $2.97 to $3.02 compared to $2.91 to $2.96 previously.
This compares to $2.83 of adjusted earnings per share in 2020.
This growth reflects strong base business and acquisition performance growth of 11% to 13% in constant currency, partially offset by the impacts I just mentioned related to COVID-19 costs, our incremental ERP investments and the tax headwind.
Based on the expected timing of some expense items such as COVID-19 costs and brand marketing investments as well as a low tax rate in the first half of last year, we expect our earnings growth to be weighted to the second half of the year.
Our first quarter performance was a strong start to the year, and we are optimistic for the balance of the year, though we recognize we are lapping a very strong earnings performance in the second quarter of 2020 while also making investments to drive growth in 2021.
In summary, we are projecting strong underlying base business performance and growth from acquisitions in our 2021 outlook, with earnings growth partially offset by incremental COVID-19 costs, the ERP investments as well as a higher projected effective tax rate.
Now that Mike has shared our financial results and outlook in more detail, I would like to recap the key takeaways, as seen on slide 34.
Our first quarter results, with double-digit sales, adjusted operating income and earnings growth bode an outstanding start to the year and bolster our confidence in a stronger 2021 outlook.
We have a strong foundation and a balanced portfolio, which drives consistency in our performance.
We are confident the sustainability of higher at-home consumption will persist beyond the pandemic and we are well positioned to capitalize on accelerating consumer trends as well as prepared for away from home consumption recovery.
Cholula and FONA have both started the year with strong momentum in results.
Our enthusiasm for these acquisitions and our confidence that we will deliver on our plan has only strengthened over the last few months.
Our fundamentals, momentum and growth outlook are stronger than ever.
Our 2021 outlook reflects another year of differentiated growth and performance while also making investments for the future.
We are confident we will continue on our growth trajectory in 2021 and beyond.
