With me is Bruce Caswell, president and chief executive officer; and Rick Nadeau, chief financial officer.
Please remember that such statements are only predictions.
Actual events and results may differ materially as a result of the risks we face, including those discussed in Exhibit 99.1 of our SEC filings.
Management uses this information in its internal analysis of results, and we believe this information may be informative to investors, engaging the quality of our financial performance, identifying trends in our results, and providing meaningful period-to-period comparisons.
And with that, I'll hand the call over to Rick.
First, let me say that since the COVID-19 pandemic, Bruce and I have never been prouder to lead an organization with such heart, dedication, ingenuity, and collaboration at all levels.
Underscoring the critical nature of our work, many of our core program operations in the United States and abroad, have been deemed essential to ensure that vital government programs continue to operate and citizens continue to receive critical assistance at a time when the need for healthcare and safety net programs is rising.
The entire MAXIMUS team has met this challenge and worked tirelessly to ensure that we continue to support citizens during this unprecedented health pandemic.
Our employees are accomplishing extraordinary things during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Bruce will discuss in greater detail, but I would like to highlight some important accomplishments.
First and foremost, we implemented robust pay leave options to ensure the safety and well-being of those employees who experienced COVID-19-related absences.
We mandated social distancing across all operations, significantly enhanced our sanitation measures, and most importantly, we continue to transition more employees to work from home.
Outside the United States, we have partnered with the government in the United Kingdom to redeploy some of our healthcare professionals directly into the National Health Service, as well as case management and administrative staff into the Department for Work and Pensions to provide vital frontline support.
Our priority has been the health and safety of our employees and ensuring that we can continue to support our government clients in whatever model that takes, as demand for government services surges.
No one can predict with certainty the scale or length of disruption from the COVID-19 pandemic or how deep and severe economic impacts will be.
We completed our normal bottoms-up quarterly review in April and reinstating guidance for fiscal 2020.
We think it is important to give our investors a sense of our current expectations for the fiscal year.
Please note, however, that our actual results could vary from the guidance due to numerous factors, including a worsening of the pandemic; erosion due to budgetary pressures; additional steps were taken by federal, provincial, state, or local governments to restrict business operations or limit office occupancy; delayed or missed payments by customers or supply chain disruptions affecting IT or safety equipment.
The ranges we have used are wider than typical at the midpoint of the year and reflect the increased risk and variability we face.
It is possible that actual results could vary materially from our current expectations.
We anticipate that fiscal 2020 revenue will range between 3.15 to $3.25 billion and diluted earnings per share to range between $2.95 and $3.15 per share.
Cash from operations is now expected to range between 250 and $300 million and free cash flow between 200 to $250 million.
While we feel comfortable with this cash flow range, I will point out that delays in collections of receivables can cause significant variation at year end.
For the remainder of the fiscal year, we anticipate continued disruption across all segments with some offsetting favorability from new work.
This disruption is expected to be most pronounced in our outside the US segment.
We expect some positive impacts in the two US segments from opportunities that in some cases we have won and in other cases are pursuing.
Bruce will provide more detail in his remarks.
Let me touch on second-quarter results, COVID-19 impacts, as well as the challenges and opportunities that lie ahead.
Revenue for the second quarter of fiscal 2020 totaled $818.1 million, which included the full ramp-up of the Census contract in the US federal services segment.
Total company operating margin was 4.6% and diluted earnings per share were $0.43, reflecting two substantial impacts in the quarter.
First, we had a pandemic-related writedown of approximately $24 million or $0.28 per share related to the decline in estimates for future period outcomes-based payments on welfare-to-work programs in the United Kingdom and Australia.
Second, a change order for approximately $9 million or $0.11 per share was signed after quarter end in the US health and human services segment.
The related costs were incurred in the first two quarters of fiscal 2020, but the revenue will be recognized in the third quarter, which falls to the bottom line in that period.
I will now review the segments.
Second-quarter revenue for the US health and human services segment increased 6.2% over the prior year and all growth was organic, resulting from new contracts and the expansion of existing work.
Both revenue and the 15% operating margin were tempered largely by the change order previously discussed.
The COVID-19 pandemic impacted the last three weeks of March 2020.
Disruption to our US health and human services business has varied as local and state governments imposed different working requirements designed to ensure worker safety, leading us to, in some cases managed through temporary site closures.
To address social distancing requirements in our call centers, our work from home capabilities was scaled at a rapid pace to enable continued support of essential services and to meet deliverables on the predominantly performance-based contracts in this segment.
Our current assumptions indicate economics for this segment will continue to experience minor disruption, and we expect an operating margin between 17% and 18% for the full year.
Looking ahead, not only have the MAXIMUS operational teams been able to manage core operations in an ever-evolving environment, but they have also taken on new work associated with unemployment insurance and a variety of COVID-related work.
Further, the business development teams have launched rapid action plans to help states address needs, resources, and gaps with support services.
Revenue for the second quarter of fiscal in the US federal services segment increased to $393.4 million.
All growth in this segment was organic.
Excluding the citizen engagement centers' contracts, organic growth was 6.7%, driven by new work and growth on existing contracts.
The operating margin for this segment in the second quarter of fiscal 2020 was 7.7%, which was tempered by unfavorable impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic on performance-based work and ongoing investments in business development.
The majority of revenue in this segment is generated by cost plus contracts, which means that we can recover certain COVID-related costs, such as increased facility cleaning incurred on these contracts.
The Census contract is now approaching its peak level of operations and delivered approximately $140 million of revenue in the second quarter, yielding year-to-date revenue of approximately $210 million.
The teams have continued to solve unique challenges for our clients in our Census contract is no exception.
We implemented operational changes to ensure that our support is available to citizens so they can complete their census questionnaires and we will continue providing assistance through the Census Bureau's extended response period which now ends October 31.
As a result, our contract has expanded to support the new deadline and we now estimate that the Census contract will deliver between $430 and $450 million for the full year.
This is an increase from our previously expected revenue of $360 million in fiscal 2020 from this contract.
The economics of this segment are largely intact through fiscal 2020.
The US federal services segment is estimated to deliver a full-year operating margin between 8% and 9% resulting from a slightly greater mix of cost plus work from previously anticipated, as well as our continued investment in both business development and technical capability.
The COVID-19 pandemic has had the most pronounced effect on our outside the US segment.
Second-quarter revenue was $116.0 million and this segment had a loss of $26.7 million.
As a reminder, this segment has several significant performance-based contracts where payments are tied directly to job seeker outcomes with the primary goal of placing individuals into long-term, sustained employment to achieve economic independence.
Revenue was recognized based on our estimate of the number of individuals who we anticipate reaching these milestones.
As a result of the pandemic, we reduced our estimates of those job seekers who are likely to achieve employment outcomes.
The accounting rules require us to record our best estimate of the future outcomes and therefore the impact of those reestimates immediately.
This resulted in a pandemic related writedown of approximately $24 million or $0.28 per share related to a decline in estimates for future period outcomes-based payments on welfare-to-work programs in the United Kingdom and Australia.
Although we are continuing to service participants in these programs where we can, many participants have underlying health conditions that require them to self-isolate at home and the pool of available employment opportunities is currently significantly lower than before.
The remainder of fiscal 2020 is expected to experience impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic related to our HAAS contract in the UK.
While our face-to-face assessments work is currently suspended, we are working to introduce telephone assessments and continuing to process paper-based assessments.
We are proud to partner with the government to be a part of the solution to this worldwide health crisis.
In the last few weeks, many of our healthcare professionals have volunteered to be seconded to the National Health Service.
We will act in an agency capacity for those employees on secondment and will receive reimbursement of most of our costs, but we will not earn revenue or profit.
This segment is expected to end the full year in an operating loss position.
To give you more color, we expect the fourth quarter for this segment to come in a little below break-even.
Our objective is for a progressive improvement in the third quarter with an aim to cut the second-quarter loss in half.
Looking ahead, we are starting to see new opportunities develop to address the significant impact of the pandemic on global labor markets.
In fiscal 2021 and beyond, we anticipate we will see an expanded need for our services as we help our government's expand and adapt their employment programs to cope with widespread unemployment.
In the UK, we are in the process of transitioning some of our outcomes-based employment services contracts that are currently in a loss position to cost recovery contracts which should provide considerably more stability and flexibility.
We expect these contract changes will be temporary, as we work with the Department on transitioning to a new model with rising unemployment.
Turning to the balance sheet.
We finished the second quarter with cash and cash equivalents of approximately $126 million.
Cash provided by operations was $22 million.
Free cash flow was $13.4 million in the quarter.
Second-quarter cash provided by operations was tempered by a combination of lower income and a higher proportion of income taxes paid in the quarter and accounts receivable grew in the first half of the fiscal-year 2020 due to increased revenue levels.
DSOs were 72 days.
We are continuing to monitor collections closely and I would like to point out that one day of DSO is roughly $9 million receivables, which directly impacts estimated cash provided by operations and free cash flow.
We entered the COVID-19 pandemic with a strong balance sheet and a resolve to manage liquidity and maintain flexibility.
While we face uncertainties including state budgetary pressures, payments to date from our customers have continued without disruption.
Our historical experience during economic downturns is that our designation as an essential service provider in the United States puts us in a favorable position in working with our clients on invoicing and payments.
However, we recognize that our customers are experiencing significant disruption to their tax receipts, and we will continue to manage the company in a conservative manner.
Going forward, the management team and the board of directors intend to take a prudent and constructive approach to deployment over the coming months.
Currently, we do not anticipate disruption to our future quarterly cash dividends.
Our quarterly 10b5-1 Share Purchase Plan expired naturally in March when the cap embedded in the program was met.
We have paused share purchases in significant M&A activity until we see an easing of the uncertainties resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
We continue to work on smaller, tuck-in transactions that will support future organic growth in a meaningful way.
Bruce and I are optimistic the MAXIMUS will emerge from this disruption as a stronger company.
We have been able to demonstrate that we can navigate, innovate, and showcase our operational effectiveness during challenging events while continuing to support the most vulnerable populations and protecting our workforce during this world crisis.
We believe that our efforts over the past two months have further cemented our position as a trusted reliable partner that brings scale, talent and real business solutions to bear.
And with that, I will hand the call over to Bruce.
Like Rick, I could not be more proud of our employees' efforts during these unprecedented times.
COVID-19 is a global pandemic that impacts all of us.
We are working around the clock to ensure we protect our employees, while still serving government and the vulnerable populations who rely on the health and human services programs we operate; a demand, which is only increasing under the impacts of this pandemic.
In mid-March, we rapidly developed a response to fast-moving COVID-19 challenges and implemented new policies emphasizing paid sick leave, social distancing, and significantly enhanced cleaning regimens to keep our employees safe and healthy.
And I'll touch on some of the most salient actions taken in my remarks.
If you hover over each box, additional details will be highlighted for each initiative.
As part of our efforts, we are following the more restrictive recommendations outlined in the Federal Families First Coronavirus Response Act, and in some cases, we are exceeding the Act.
While the Act does not apply to MAXIMUS because we have more than 500 employees, we felt it provided a good benchmark for supporting and safeguarding our employees.
Our income continuity plans are fully funded by MAXIMUS and cover a variety of scenarios, including quarantine, child care, government-mandated restrictions, office closure, and employees who are in high-risk categories.
Under these leave options, an employee's health insurance is also protected and we are not requiring them to take their accrued paid time off or PTO in order to access these leave options.
We also realize that employee stress and anxiety is heightened during this time.
Balancing the strains of normal life during the crisis has been difficult for us all.
Consistent, frequent, and transparent communications to our staff remain vital.
To further support our team members, we've launched topical videos from our chief medical officer, mental health seminars, virtual development training classes, as well as wellness apps such as Headspace and Wellbeats.
Moving on to the next slide, one of the most impressive things we've done is the systematic and ongoing transition of employees to work from home.
This has been a heroic effort in procuring new equipment, increasing network capacity, and deploying new services, all while keeping operations running to meet program needs.
There are significant IT challenges in transitioning to a work from a home model, ranging from information security and privacy requirements to ensuring continuity of services.
Many government programs were never designed to be carried out in a remote environment, presenting high hurdles to immediately enable a remote workforce.
This transition is also taking place during a pandemic is driven global IT equipment supply chain shortage.
Equipment such as laptops and headsets are imperative for our customer service representatives to effectively serve citizens.
But we've been working diligently with suppliers and have made great progress.
MAXIMUS has also been able to overcome these challenges by capitalizing on the strategic investments we've made in our IT infrastructure including emerging technologies such as secure remote network platforms and cloud-based omnichannel telephony environments.
For example, we leveraged our planned migration to Amazon Web Services or AWS to provision nearly 9000 secure agent desktops through the Amazon WorkSpaces as a service model thus far, in addition to approximately 7500 VPN connection users.
Our ability to deploy HIPAA-compliant work from home capabilities enabled us to maintain operational continuity and assist program participants remotely for more complex services including clinical and social assessments required to access important government benefits and services.
Most importantly, we believe we are forging a path forward for government services longer term.
The pandemic offers us a unique opportunity to test and learn new models with full support from our clients.
It gives us the opportunity to trial new ways of serving and engaging citizens who now, more than ever, need access to vital services.
We also have gained an entirely new dataset related to citizen engagement, channel preferences, and agent performance, which enables us to optimize this model.
This also allows us long term to evaluate the optimal environment for each individual employee.
While not every employee is best matched to a remote work environment, the results of early pilots indicate no statistically significant reduction in agent performance on the contracts being measured.
This type of robust data will be meaningful in solutioning new delivery methods.
As we move into the next phase of this pandemic, we believe one of the most important ways to safeguard employees, keep operations running and ensure citizens can access the services they need is to implement an employee wellness check before and during their workday.
Our digital team developed a health assessment mobile application called Clear To Work.
An employee will use the app before coming to work each day, the app takes them through a series of questions, including a self-administered temperature check.
The app either clears the employee to come to work or instructs them to stay at home that day.
If the employees are cleared, they are given a time-limited digital credential to show when they arrive at work, and then complete a second temperature check during their day.
The app was developed and implemented in roughly two weeks and is being systematically deployed across operational sites to review other geographic rollouts based on local health guidance and requirements.
In concert with this, we've also implemented a mandatory face-covering policy across our US operations, while ensuring our servicing approach protects supplies to front-line health professionals.
And while we've talked about the operational disruptions and how we're tackling those, I've been pleased with how our teams have responded to the calls for support from our clients as they rapidly design and procure solutions to address the pandemic.
Our ability to quickly pivot has underscored the resilience of our business model and our position as a trusted partner to governments worldwide.
Over the last four weeks, we've been helping our clients solve real challenges of rising caseloads and reduced resources.
To this end, we've won a number of COVID-related contracts, as well as new work associated with rising unemployment.
Let's start with our Federal team, as you may recall Maximus was already supporting the CDC's information line.
At the beginning of the pandemic, the CDC requested that MAXIMUS provide bilingual support for COVID-19 phone lines and emails.
This 24/7 coverage began with 50 agents and has grown 250 plus more than 40 nurses.
Our most recent statistics show that we are responding to more than 16, 000, and 2000 emails per day.
We were also selected to deliver the Federal Health and Human Services community-based testing centers or result center.
Under this contract, MAXIMUS provides COVID-19 test results to patients that are tested at various federal testing centers across the nation.
Our team did an astounding job in solutioning a turnkey contact center in less than six days which has since seen enormous growth.
The contract launched with 260 call center agents, making outbound calls to patients to deliver test results from 47 emergency facilities across the US Today, a team of more than 2,000 agents now contacts 10,000 individuals per day and provides real-time geo-mapping of COVID-19 test results to the US Department of Health and Human Services.
MAXIMUS has played a critical role in supporting Federal agencies following the Cares Act implementation.
Firstly, MAXIMUS supported the IRS to ensure that the economic impact payments were paid in a timely manner while continuing our normal tax season support.
Secondly, as you may be aware, MAXIMUS operates the debt management project at Federal Student Aid.
We waived payment on student loans during the pandemic.
Within 10 days of this waiver, MAXIMUS sent more than 2 million letters to student loan holders and made system changes to support the waivers.
On the state level, we've partnered with the California Department of Public Health to answer phone calls from state residents and provide basic, general, non-medical information about COVID-19.
We are in the process of working to potentially expand our offerings to include digital channels such as webchat to further engage and support California residents.
Importantly, this project is using an entirely work from a home model, protecting our staff and helping employ residents who may have experienced job loss during the crisis.
Since mid-April, MAXIMUS has been providing New York State with dedicated COVID-19 support including ramping up the state's COVID-19 hotline to screen and schedule tests for New Yorkers, as well as helping the state manage outbound calls to reach healthcare workers to volunteer to help with the COVID-19 crisis.
Our call center representatives have managed to successfully connect more than 30,000 New Yorkers to critical COVID-19 testing resources and obtain more than 14,500 responses from healthcare workers through surveys.
And just last week, we won our first state contract in Indiana to centralize contact tracing for Hoosiers who test positive for COVID-19.
We'll hire and train an estimated 500 people under the supervision of the Indiana State Department of Health epidemiologists.
The remote call center is anticipated to be operational by May 11, and we'll support individuals at least through the end of the year, if not longer, dependent upon the pandemic needs of the state and its citizens.
Our Canadian team also quickly adapted and in only two days launched a COVID-19 information line for our British Columbia provincial government client.
Those team members answer important questions about testing locations, employment concerns, quarantine non-compliance reports, and the like.
Across the globe, unemployment benefit claims have skyrocketed.
As of May 1st, more than 30 million people in the United States filed claims triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic.
This forewarns of more downstream implications to governments at all levels.
Safety net programs like Medicaid, SNAP and others are expected to face similar surges in applications.
Government programs face staffing, process, and system challenges in meeting the demand.
Governments also face the daunting task of governing under a new normal, enabling citizens to return safely to a normal life under the continuing threat of new outbreaks and the consequences of a damaged economy.
MAXIMUS has rapidly responded to meet the immediate demand for information and application assistance while positioning to provide longer-term services as the economy recovers.
Let me give you a few examples of new work with compressed time scales that we have met with our response.
In only eight days, we launched a contact center to support the District of Columbia office of unemployment compensation.
In North Carolina, we launched a new project to support questions pertaining to the unemployment insurance program.
This was done in less than a week to support the division of economic security and has rapidly scaled to 1800 agents.
We are also doing similar work in Arkansas, Rhode Island, and Vermont, responding to frequently asked questions and assisting residents with their unemployment applications.
Across the country, other team members continue to support our health and human services clients, ensuring vitally important services are delivered to the public.
Moving on to new awards in the pipeline.
Our reported numbers reflect the status as of March 31st and much has changed since then.
Before I address some of these dynamics, I'll briefly cover the awards in the pipeline at March 31st.
For the second quarter of fiscal-year 2020, signed awards were $729.8 million of the total contract value at March 31st.
Further, at March 31st, there were another $215.8 million worth of contracts that had been awarded, not yet signed.
Let's turn our attention to our pipeline of addressable sales opportunities.
Our total contract value pipeline at March 31st was $29.2 billion, compared to $30.6 billion reported in the first quarter of FY '20.
Of our total pipeline of sales opportunities, 65.7% represents new work.
In regard to pipeline dynamics, we cannot accurately predict the pattern this pandemic may follow nor the timing and form of the recovery.
Certain clients impacted by COVID-19 are making awards in record time and relying heavily on existing contract relationships and trusted partners like MAXIMUS.
This comes in some cases at the cost of delaying other prior procurements that were in process.
In other instances, particularly in Federal, agencies not impacted significantly by the pandemic have stuck closely to procurement schedules.
Therefore, it's important to put all of this in context.
While we are excited about the new work, many of the new COVID-related programs are expected to be temporary, but provide flexibility to scale and extend services as circumstances warrant.
We also must be mindful that many of our government clients will likely face budgetary pressures as a result of a pandemic driven economic recession.
While we're cautiously optimistic, it's difficult to predict what impact these events may have on erosion, timing on new work, and simply getting some of our operations back to somewhat of a normal cadence.
The updated guidance, of course, incorporates all of these dynamics, based on what we know today.
We actively manage a portfolio of work and have earned a reputation as a trusted long-term partner, all of which enables us to adapt to changing economic times.
I've been inspired by the dedication, selflessness, and resilience seen across our business in recent weeks.
The resilience of our business model has also been impressive and of our employees, even more so.
As Rick mentioned, one of the most inspiring stories comes from our colleagues in the United Kingdom, where we're in the process of deploying nearly 1,000 volunteer doctors, nurses, and other clinicians to the NHS to provide vital support on the front line.
Dr. Paul Williams, division president of MAXIMUS, UK, volunteered to serve along with our team members.
In addition, non-clinical colleagues are preparing for redeployment in support of the national effort.
This represents the true heart of MAXIMUS and our more than 35,000 employees around the world.
It has been remarkable to witness how our colleagues are coming together to support the global effort against this pandemic, and the safety and well-being of our employees will continue to remain our top priority.
Governments are also planning for the time when as we emerge from this crisis, our core capabilities in finding jobs for the unemployed, ensuring access to healthcare, and administering critical safety net programs will be needed more than ever.
The world will be a different place for sure, but so will the landscape for services and how they are delivered.
The work we've done in helping clients innovate, scale, and still meet citizens' needs will be a game-changer.
New opportunities will also emerge and we are well-positioned to respond.
With that, we'll open up the line for Q&A.
