Today's remarks also include certain non-GAAP financial measures.
So with that said, let's turn to our fiscal 2021 third-quarter results.
Given the continued challenging operating environment as a result of COVID-19, we are very pleased with our overall results for the quarter and for the full 2020, 2021 North American ski season.
Results continued to improve as the season progressed, primarily as a result of stronger destination visitation at our Colorado and Utah resorts, including improved lift ticket repurchases relative to the fiscal 2021 second-quarter results.
destination, mountain resorts and regional ski areas for the third quarter was only a down 3% compared to the third quarter of fiscal 2019.
Whistler Blackcomb's performance continued to be negatively impacted due to the continued closure of the Canadian border to international guests, including guests from the U.S., and was further impacted by the resort closing earlier than expected on March 30, 2021, following a provincial health order issued by the government of British Columbia.
Whistler Blackcomb's total visitation for the third quarter declined nearly 60% to the third quarter of fiscal 2019.
While visitation and revenue trends improved throughout the quarter, our ancillary lines of business continue to be significantly and negatively impacted by COVID-19-related capacity constraints and limitations, particularly in food and beverage and ski school.
We maintained disciplined cost controls throughout the quarter and continue operating our ancillary lines of business at reduced capacity.
As Rob mentioned, we're very pleased with our overall results for the quarter and for the full 2020-2021 North American ski season.
As a reminder, in the prior year, we announced the early closure of the 2019-2020 North American ski season for our ski areas, lodging properties, and retail rental stores as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic beginning on March 15, 2020.
These actions had a significant adverse impact on our results of operations for the third fiscal quarter of 2020.
Additionally, the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting limitations and restrictions on our operations continued to have an adverse impact on our results for the third fiscal quarter of 2021.
Net income attributable to Vail Resorts was $274.6 million or $6.72 per diluted share for the third quarter of fiscal 2021, compared to net income attributable to Vail Resorts of $152.5 million or $3.74 per diluted share in the prior year.
Resort reported EBITDA was $462.2 million in the third fiscal quarter, which compares to resort reported EBITDA of $304.4 million in the same period in the prior year.
ski season in the current year with particularly strong demand at our Colorado and Utah destination resorts.
Resort-reported EBITDA margin for the third quarter was 52%, exceeding both the prior-year period of 43.9% and fiscal 2019 third quarter of 50.2%.
These results reflect our rigorous approach to cost management, as well as a higher proportion of lift revenue relative to ancillary lines of business compared to prior periods.
Now, turning to our outlook for fiscal 2021.
Net income attributable to Vail Resorts, Inc. is expected to be between $93 million and $139 million for fiscal 2021.
We expect the resort-reported EBITDA for fiscal 2021 will be between $530 million and $570 million, and we expect the resort-reported EBITDA margin for fiscal 2021 will be approximately 28.9% using the midpoint of the guidance range.
Our guidance assumes all of our operations are open and aligned with current health and safety protocols and capacity restrictions.
Current demand trends continue.
We experienced normal weather conditions throughout the Australia's East season and North American summer season, and there is no impact from potential COVID-19-related shutdowns or lockdowns.
The guidance specifically assumes no impact from potential demand or operational disruptions associated with the current lockdowns in Victoria, Australia.
We continue to maintain significant liquidity.
Our total cash and revolver availability as of April 30, 2021, was approximately $2 billion, with $1.3 billion of cash on hand, $419 million of U.S. revolver availability under the Vail Holdings credit agreement, and $203 million of revolver availability under the Whistler Credit Agreement.
As of April 30, 2021, our net debt was 2.8 times trailing 12 months total reported EBITDA.
We remain confident in the strong cash flow generation and stability of our business model, and we will continue to be disciplined stewards of our capital with a focus on high-return capital projects, continuous investment in our people, and strategic acquisition opportunities.
While we are not reinstating the dividend this quarter, we remain committed to returning capital to shareholders, and our board of directors will continue to closely monitor the economic and public health outlook on a quarterly basis to assess the appropriate time to reinstate the dividend.
We're very pleased with the results for our season pass sales to date with guests showing strong enthusiasm for the enhanced value proposition of our pass products, driven in part by the 20% reduction in all pass prices for the upcoming season.
pass product sales through June 1, 2021, for the upcoming 2021-2022 North American ski season increased very significantly as compared to the sales through June 2, 2020, for the 2020-2021 North American ski season due to lack of any spring sales deadlines in 2020 as a result of COVID-19, making the year-over-year comparison to the spring 2020 results not relevant for performance trends.
Compared to sales for the 2019-2020 North American ski season through June 4, 2019, pass product sales for the 2021-2022 season to June 1, 2021, increased approximately 50% in units and 33% in sales dollars.
Pass product sales are adjusted to include Peak Resorts' pass sales in both periods and eliminate the impact of foreign currency by applying an exchange rate of $0.83 between the Canadian dollar and U.S. dollar in both periods for Whistler Blackcomb.
As a reminder, pass product sales for the full selling season through December 6, 2020, as compared to the full selling season through December 8, 2019, increased approximately 20% in units and approximately 19% in sales dollars.
Relative to season-to-date pass sale products -- relative to season-to-date, pass product sales for the 2019-2020 season through June 4, 2019, we saw very strong unit growth with our renewing passholders and even stronger unit growth in new passholders, which includes guests in our database, the previously purchased lift tickets or passes that did not buy a pass in the previous season and guests who are completely new to our database.
We saw our strongest unit growth in our destination markets, particularly in the Northeast, and also had very strong growth across our local markets.
Compared to the period ended June 4, 2019, effective pass price decreased 10% as compared to the 20% price decrease we implemented this year.
We believe this highlights how our lower pricing has increased the propensity of passholders to spend a portion of the new discount to purchase higher-valued pass products.
We expected that the price reduction would result in higher pass renewal rates, increased trade up to higher-value passes, and drive incremental guests to our network.
We are encouraged that each of these trends is evident in the season-to-date pass sales results, which we believe supports our expected results for next year, as well as the expected long-term benefits of increasing guest lifetime value.
The pass results exceeded our original expectations to the impact of the 20% price reduction.
However, we still have the majority of our pass selling season ahead of us, and it is not yet clear if these trends will continue through the fall.
In addition, we are very pleased that ongoing sales of the Epic Australia pass, which ends on June 15, 2021, are up approximately 43% in units through June 1, 2021, as compared to the comparable period through June 4, 2019, representing significant growth following the acquisition of Falls Creek and Hotham in April 2019.
Given the recent COVID-19-related lockdowns in Victoria, Australia, we will be monitoring any impacts on the Epic Australia pass sales.
Our commitment to reinvesting in our resorts and the guest experience remains one of our highest priorities.
As previously announced this summer and fall, we will be completing several signature investments subject to regulatory approvals.
In Colorado, we are moving forward with a 250-acre lift-served terrain expansion in the signature McCoy Park area of Beaver Creek, further differentiating the resort's high-end family focused experience.
We also plan to add a new four-person high-speed lift at Breckenridge to serve the popular peak 7, replace the Peru lift at Keystone with a six-person high-speed chairlift and replace the Peachtree lift at Crested Butte with a new three-person fixed-grip lift.
At Okemo, we plan to compete a transportational investment, including upgrading the Quantum lift from a four-person to a six-person high-speed chair lift and relocating the existing four-person Quantum lift to replace the Green Ridge three-person fixed-grip chairlift.
These investments will greatly improve uplift capacity, further enhance the guest experience, and complete our $35 million capital plan for the season.
We remain highly focused on investments that will further our companywide technology enhancements to support our data-driven approach, guest experience, and corporate infrastructure.
As part of these efforts, we are continuing to invest in resources and technology to improve our customer service experience, including significant staffing increases in our call centers and self-service technology that will provide our guests the ability to better manage their own accounts.
We will also continue to invest in ongoing maintenance capital to support infrastructure across our resorts.
As we head into next year, we know that talent and staffing will be critical for our success, as it always is.
And we have announced that we will be raising our minimum entry wages in Colorado, Utah, Washington, and California to $15 per hour while also making material increases in the entry wages of our Eastern resorts, which will be set based upon their local market dynamics.
This will be our largest discretionary investment in operating expense this year, which we believe will be offset by a portion of other savings we will carry from this year into next year.
I'm deeply grateful for the commitment our teams continue to demonstrate throughout these unprecedented circumstances.
