Before we begin our call today, I want to remind you that in order to talk about our company, we're going to mention a few things that are not historical facts.
These non-GAAP measures are adjusted net loss, adjusted loss per share, adjusted operating loss, EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA.
We're using these non-GAAP measures today because they allow us to compare performance consistently over various periods without regard to nonrecurring items.
In addition, RPC is required to use EBITDA to report compliance with financial covenants under our revolving credit facility.
Please review these disclosures if you're interested in seeing how they're calculated.
The second quarter represented a transition quarter for RPC.
We saw numerous signs of increased demand for our services and have a full frac calendar for most of the third quarter.
This is the most visibility we have had since pre-COVID.
Nevertheless, we did experience an air pocket in June customer activity due to some jobs being pushed and heavier rains in the Permian.
July is shaping up to be substantially better than our second quarter run rate and the remainder of the third quarter appears consistent with July at this point.
Our CFO, Ben Palmer, will discuss this and other financial results in more detail, after which I will provide some closing comments.
Second quarter of 2021, revenues increased to $188.8 million compared to $89.3 million in the second quarter of the prior year.
Revenues increased due primarily to higher activity levels and improved pricing compared to the second quarter of the prior year.
Revenues also increased in the second quarter of 2021 because the second quarter of the prior year was severely impacted by COVID-19.
This impact affected all of our year-over-year comparisons.
Operating loss for the second quarter was $1.2 million compared to an adjusted operating loss of $35.9 million in the second quarter of the prior year.
EBITDA for the second quarter of this year was $17.3 million compared to adjusted EBITDA of negative $17.8 million in the same period of the prior year.
We approached breakeven per share results in the second quarter of 2021 compared to an adjusted loss per share of $0.10 in the second quarter of 2020.
Cost of revenues during the second quarter of 2021 was $145.8 million or 77.2% of revenues compared to $80 million or 89.6% of revenues during the second quarter of the prior year.
Cost of revenues increased primarily due to increases in expenses consistent with higher activity levels.
Cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues decreased due to the leverage of higher revenues over certain direct costs, fixed direct costs.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased to $29.4 million in the second quarter of this year compared to $28.8 million in the second quarter of the prior year.
These expenses included higher bad debt expense and expenses consistent with higher activity levels, primarily offset by lower [Indecipherable].
Depreciation and amortization decreased slightly to $17.9 million in the second quarter of 2021 compared to $19.6 million in the second quarter of the prior year as capex has remained relatively low.
Our Technical Services segment revenues for the quarter increased to 118.7% compared to the same quarter in the prior year due to significantly higher activity and some pricing improvement.
Segment operating profit in the second quarter of 2021 was $1.4 million compared to $34.1 million operating loss in the second quarter of the prior year.
Our Support Services segment revenues for the quarter increased 44.1% compared to the same quarter in the prior year.
Segment operating loss this year was $2.4 million compared to an operating loss of $1.9 million in the second quarter of the prior year.
On a sequential basis, our second quarter revenues increased 3.4% from $182.6 million in the prior quarter due to activity increases in most of our service lines.
The improvement was negatively impacted by multiple frac jobs pushing into July.
Cost of revenues during the second quarter of 2021 was $145.8 million, relatively unchanged from the prior quarter.
As a percentage of revenues, cost of revenues decreased from 80.1% in the first quarter of this year to 77.2% to the second quarter due to a favorable job mix in several service lines as well as the impact of the CARES Act employee retention credit that we recognized during the quarter.
Selling, general and administrative expenses during the second quarter of 2021 decreased 3.9% to $29.4 million from $30.6 million in the prior quarter, and this was also due to the impact of the retention tax credit.
RPC incurred an operating loss of $1.2 million during the second quarter of 2021 compared to an operating loss of $10.5 million in the prior quarter.
RPC's EBITDA was $17.3 million during the quarter compared to EBITDA of $7.8 million in the first quarter.
Our Technical Services segment revenues increased by $3.5 million or 2% to $176.1 million in the second quarter due to increased activity levels in most of the segment's service lines.
RPC's Technical Services segment generated a $1.4 million operating profit in the current quarter compared to an operating loss of $5.8 million in the prior quarter.
Support Services segment revenues increased by $2.7 million or 26.8% to $12.6 million during the second quarter.
Operating loss was $2.4 million compared to an operating loss of $2.9 million in the previous quarter.
During the second quarter, RPC operated up to six horizontal pressure pumping fleets.
And early in the third quarter, we reactivated, at minimal cost, a seventh fleet to meet incremental demand.
Second quarter 2021 capital expenditures were $14.1 million, and we currently estimate full year 2021 capital expenditures to be approximately $65 million, comprised primarily of capitalized maintenance of our existing equipment and selected growth opportunities.
Second quarter revenues improved sequentially as drilling and completion activities continued to increase due to improving oil prices and a strengthening economy.
We are pleased with the increased activity levels and our ability to pass through cost increase to our customers.
We have not been able -- we have not yet been able to consistently achieve net pricing improvements but are optimistic that, that will change soon.
Our ESG-friendly Tier four and dual-fuel frac equipment is in very high demand, and we expect to see pricing power here first.
We began the third quarter with indications that our customer base is responding to higher commodity prices with increased drilling and completion plans during the remainder of the year and into 2022.
At the end of the second quarter, RPC's cash balance was $121 million, and we remain debt-free.
