Sorry for that break.
Before we begin our call today, I need to remind you that in order to talk about our company, we're going to mention a few things that are not historical facts.
These non-GAAP measures are adjusted net loss, adjusted loss per share, adjusted operating loss, EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA.
We're using these non-GAAP measures today because they allow us to compare performance consistently over various periods without regard to nonrecurring items.
In addition, RPC is required to use EBITDA to report compliance with financial covenants under our revolving credit facility.
Please review these disclosures if you're interested in seeing how they're calculated.
2020 was a very challenging year on many levels.
Fortunately, the world is coming to terms with the COVID-19 pandemic and hydrocarbon demand is slowly but surely recovering.
This has led to a reduction in oil inventory to near its five year average, aided by supportive OPEC+ actions to date.
As a result, the outlook for the oil and gas prices is encouraging, which should support modest growth in industry activities.
The first quarter played out largely as we expected, except for the unusually severe cold weather during February.
Our estimate is that this event negatively impacted our EBITDA by approximately $5 million.
Notwithstanding that event, we see encouraging trends in most of our service lines, which gives us confidence in our 2021 outlook.
Our CFO, Ben Palmer, will discuss this and other financial results in more detail, after which I will provide some closing comments.
For the first quarter of 2021, revenues decreased to $182.6 million compared to $243.8 million in the first quarter of the prior year.
Revenues decreased due primarily to significantly lower activity levels, including the February adverse weather conditions, and lower pricing compared to the first quarter of the prior year.
Operating loss for the first quarter was $10.5 million compared to an adjusted operating loss of $13.2 million in the first quarter of the prior year.
EBITDA for the first quarter was $7.8 million compared to adjusted EBITDA of $25.8 million in the same period of the prior year.
Loss per share was $0.05 in the first quarter of this year compared to adjusted loss per share of $0.04 in the first quarter of 2020.
Cost of revenues during the first quarter of 2021 was $146.2 million or 80.1% of revenues compared to $181.9 million or 74.6% of revenues during the first quarter of 2020.
Cost of revenues declined primarily due to decreases in expenses consistent with lower activity levels and RPC's cost reduction initiatives.
Cost of revenues as a percentage of revenues increased primarily due to lower pricing for our services, increased maintenance and repair and fuel costs as well as labor and other cost inefficiencies resulting from several challenges during the quarter.
These challenges included lower activity levels, COVID compliance costs and adverse weather events in the first quarter as compared to the same period in the prior year.
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased to $30.6 million in the first quarter of 2021 compared to $36.5 million in the first quarter of the prior year.
These expenses decreased due to lower employment costs, primarily the result of cost reduction initiatives during previous quarters.
Depreciation and amortization decreased to $17.8 million in the first quarter of 2021 compared to $39.3 million in the first quarter of the prior year.
Depreciation and amortization decreased significantly primarily due to asset impairment charges recorded in previous quarters, which decreased RPC's depreciable property, plant and equipment as well as lower capital expenditures.
Our Technical Services segment revenues for the quarter decreased 24.2% compared to the same quarter in the prior year.
This was due to significantly lower activity and pricing.
Significant operating -- segment operating loss in the first quarter of 2021 was $5.8 million compared to a $12.2 million operating loss in the first quarter of the prior year.
Our Support Services segment revenues for the quarter decreased 38% compared to the same quarter in the prior year.
Segment operating loss in the first quarter of 2021 was $2.9 million compared to an operating profit of $1.5 million in the first quarter of the prior year.
On a sequential basis, RPC's first quarter revenues increased 22.9% to $182.6 million from $148.6 million in the prior quarter.
And this was due to activity increases in most of our service lines.
Cost of revenues during the first quarter of '21 -- 2021 increased by $28.3 million or 24% to $146.2 million due to expenses, which increased with higher activity levels, such as materials and supplies and employment expenses.
As a percentage of revenues, cost of revenues increased slightly from 79.3% in the fourth quarter of 2020 to 80.1% in the first quarter of 2021.
This was due to increases in M&R expenses and fuel costs, coupled with labor and other cost inefficiencies due to the adverse weather event.
Selling, general and administrative expenses during the first quarter of 2021 increased 17.6% to $30.6 million and $26 million in the prior quarter.
This was primarily due to a beneficial forfeiture rate adjustment to stock compensation that we recorded in the prior quarter.
RPC incurred an operating loss of $10.5 million during the first quarter of 2021 compared to an adjusted operating loss of $11.3 million in the prior quarter.
RPC's EBITDA was $7.8 million in the first quarter of 2021, which was the same as adjusted EBITDA of $7.8 million in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Our Technical Services segment revenues increased by $33.7 million or 24.2% to $172.6 million in the first quarter due to increased activity levels in most of the segment service lines.
The Technical Services segment incurred a $5.8 million operating loss in the current quarter compared to an operating loss of $11.3 million in the prior quarter.
Our Support Services segment revenues increased by $310,000 or 3.2% to $10 million in the first quarter.
Operating loss was $2.9 million in the current quarter compared to an operating loss of $2.6 million in the prior quarter.
During the first quarter of 2021, RPC operated five horizontal pressure pumping fleets, the same as in the fourth quarter, but with improved utilization.
Due to high utilization of these existing fleets, we recently added one additional horizontal fleet to meet expected incremental demand.
First quarter 2021 capital expenditures were $11.8 million, and we currently estimate full year 2021 capital expenditures to be approximately $55 million, comprised primarily of capitalized maintenance of our existing equipment and selected growth opportunities.
We are encouraged by how 2021 has started.
Activity levels and pricing have largely tracked our expectations coming into the year, and all signs point to a continued modest recovery as the year progresses.
We remain committed to capital discipline and do not plan to add incremental capacity until we have greater confidence that economic returns will justify the investment.
ESG has continued to grow as a topic of interest among many of our customers.
RPC aspires to be an environmentally friendly company.
We are adapting our operations to reduce emissions wherever possible.
We are in the final stages of upgrading another of our fleets to dual-fuel capability, after which 2/3 of our deployed frac capacity will be ESG-friendly.
However, for RPC and most of our competitors, the easy conversions are largely done.
Further ESP adaptation requires economics to improve before additional capital investments make financial sense.
While economics are not currently supportive of adding net capacity, the continued transition to ESG-friendly equipment is more likely to come from the replacement of older equipment than growth of capital expenditures.
At the end of the first quarter, RPC's cash balance was $85.4 million, and we remain debt-free.
