Looking at our third quarter performance, we are pleased to report another solid result, and we remain proud of our planned execution across all of our business service lines.
Revenue grew 4.9% to $583.7 million compared to $556.5 million for the same quarter in 2019.
Net income rose to $79.6 million or $0.24 per diluted share compared to $44.1 million or $0.13 per diluted share for the third quarter of last year.
Eddie will review the GAAP and non-GAAP results shortly as there were meaningful adjustments impacting our financials.
Revenues for the first nine months of the year were $1.62 billion, an increase of 7.6% compared to $1.51 billion for the same period last year.
Net income for the first nine months increased to $198.2 million or $0.60 per diluted share compared to $152.6 million or $0.47 per diluted share for the comparable period last year.
Again, Eddie will review these and our 9-month non-GAAP results in a few minutes.
Turning to our business lines results.
Residential pest control grew 10.5% during the quarter, reflecting the resiliency of this service and its strong demand.
As anticipated, our commercial operation revenue was down year-over-year as commercial pest control continues to be negatively impacted by the COVID-19 virus and its related economic toll.
However, some businesses reopened during the quarter.
And for some of these customers, their economic conditions improved.
We've continued to narrow the revenue shortfall gap each month since April.
Overall, we were pleased with the steady progress we've achieved under those circumstances.
John will provide greater detail on these and our other operational results shortly.
Overall, our people and business continues to perform well in what remains a complex environment.
We have an unwavering commitment to keep our employees and customers safe.
Our team's continued dedication in serving our customers has been outstanding.
They are truly our greatest asset, and we're grateful for their efforts.
Further, our commitment to safe practices involved our employees and customers as well.
We continue to benefit from the high regard, trust and confidence that our customers have in us.
John Wilson, who many of you know through his involvement on our earnings conference calls and investor meetings, was promoted to the company's Vice Chairman.
John joined the company in 1996 and has been an integral part in developing and executing Rollins strategic initiatives over the years.
This promotion is truly a testament to his leadership, work ethic and talent.
Additionally, Jerry Gahlhoff was promoted to Rollins' President and COO.
Since many of you may not be too familiar with Jerry's background, I'd like to take a minute and highlight a few of his many accomplishments.
Jerry started his career in the pets control industry in 1991 and came to Rollins in the HomeTeam acquisition in 2008.
He has successfully managed several areas of the company and has been instrumental in guiding meaningful growth and profitability in these businesses.
He most recently led what we refer to as the Rollins specialty brands team, which includes HomeTeam Pest Defense, Clark Pest control, Northwest Exterminating, Western Pest, Waltham Pest and OPC Services as well as our very important Rollins human resources department and training department.
A seasoned executive and well-respected industry leader, Jerry has a comprehensive understanding of our organization, business and is extremely well suited for the COO position.
Another little-known fact is that Jerry came from an Orkin household as his dad was a 26-year employee.
We're fortunate to have John and Jerry assume a greater role in our company, its direction in its future.
We look forward to their continued contributions.
I am excited and grateful for the opportunity to be here.
I wanted to start by providing some context to the current environment.
While the coronavirus remains prevalent in many areas, we feel positive about our financial performance this quarter and how we are executing as a company to meet the needs of our residential and commercial customers, both in the U.S. and abroad.
Our residential business remains solid.
Our call centers are busy, and we are pleased with our results from this service line.
We are also encouraged yet, at the same time, cautiously optimistic about the positive trends we have been seeing on the commercial side of our business.
As Gary noted, our third quarter commercial results were down year-over-year.
However, the operating environment steadily improved as the third quarter progressed, and we continue to see month-to-month improvements as more businesses reopened and the trust that our brands have built over time have enabled our technicians to provide service when and where needed.
Still, we are, by no way, thinking that this pandemic is over.
We remain diligent considering the current operating environment.
And with many experts projecting that another wave is possible, there remain many uncertainties.
We are executing against our plan and continue to proactively navigate the best path forward.
For example, out of concern for the health of our employees as well as our customers, stringent safety practices are ongoing and remain a top priority.
To keep our technicians safe, we continue to adhere to the advanced health and safety protocols as recommended by the CDC.
By providing a full complement of personal protective equipment for our customer-facing employees, we are continuing to build trust with our customers, while also demonstrating it is safe to do business with us.
We are also working with our customers to create a safer environment for where they live and work.
As we have discussed, Orkin and many of our other brands are now offering a commercial and residential disinfection service, which is effective in quickly and thoroughly eliminating a wide variety of serious pathogens.
While it is still early, we are pleased with the very positive reception this new service line has been receiving from existing as well as new customers.
During the third quarter, we steadily grew this new offering.
Additionally, investors have asked us about the business impact of the devastating wildfires out West as well as the recent tropical storms and hurricanes that have made landfall in the U.S. While our hearts go out to those that have been adversely affected by these natural disasters, up to now, we have not had any significant business disruption.
I would also like to take a minute to provide an update on our wildlife brands, who have experienced strong double-digit growth year-to-date.
For those of you who aren't too familiar with this business segment, the services we provide include live trapping and removal of wildlife, exclusion of wildlife from residences and other buildings and the repair and remediation of damages caused by wildlife.
There is not a more urgent call for help than that customer who has a wild animal loose in their home or business.
Although a small part of our total business, we have firmly established our position as the leading wildlife control provider in North America, and looking ahead, we believe that this is real opportunity to continue to grow this business.
Lastly, I wanted to circle back to the promotion of Jerry to President and Chief Operating Officer.
Not only does he have a strong foundation in the pest business, he does have a degree in entomology after all, he is that rarest of individuals who knows both bugs and the bug business inside out.
He works very hard at improving himself each day.
And I've watched him over the last 13 years improve every operation he has touched.
I am excited to have Jerry in this new role.
I believe that every reference that could be made regarding how long the last quarter has been has already been used, so I'm going to spare my attempt.
Your words of reflection and support were truly appreciated.
In 2016, we had our first-ever Investor Day in New York City, and our team had a chance to get to know many of you on that day.
The primary reason for holding that event was to share the depth and breadth of our management -- of our senior management team.
I've had discussions with many of you over the years about the eventual passing of the baton, and the elevation of Gary, John and Jerry show this in action.
Each of them have been well prepared for years to take their perspective and vision to lead Rollins for years to come.
We're fortunate as an organization.
And as investors, I believe that you will be pleased with what the future holds.
The obstacles that impacted Q2 began to subside, and our operations and nonoperations groups have made tremendous adjustments to the new life that we are all leading.
Today, I'll share some details on our Q3 actual results and some additional insight to what we know today that will impact the future.
For the quarter, our residential pest control and termite service lines showed growth and key to the quarter included: improvements in commercial revenue growth rates compared to the second quarter; impairment charges related to our personal protective equipment, also known as PP&E and the successful continued cost management implemented to drive margin improvements year-over-year.
As Gary referenced, I will be reporting both GAAP and non-GAAP financials that were impacted by vesting of shares this year and the impact of the pension plan moving off of our Rollins books in Q3 of 2019.
Looking at the numbers, the third quarter revenues of $583.7 million was an increase of 4.9% over the prior year's third quarter revenue of $556.5 million.
Our GAAP income before income taxes was $108.9 million or 136% above 2019.
Net income was $79.6 million, up 80.6% compared to 2019.
Our GAAP earnings per share were $0.24 per diluted share.
On a non-GAAP basis, our income before taxes was $115.6 million this year compared to $96 million last year, a 20.4% increase.
Our 2020 income before taxes was impacted by $6.7 million for the vesting of our late Chairman's Rollins shares.
Additionally, 2019 was reduced by $49.9 million for our divesting of the pension plan off of our Rollins books.
Both the vesting of shares and pension divesting were noncash items.
Our non-GAAP net income was $86.3 million this year compared to $70.6 million in Q3 of 2019, a 22.1% increase.
Looking at the first nine months revenue of $1.625 billion, that was an increase of 7.6% over the prior year's third quarter revenue of $1.509 billion.
Our GAAP income before income taxes was $267.8 million or 41.6% above 2019.
Net income was $198.2 million, up 29.9% compared to 2019.
Our GAAP earnings per share were $0.60 per diluted share.
Our non-GAAP financials, taking the share vesting and pension plan into consideration, were income before taxes of $274.5 million, up 14.8% and net income was $204.9 million this year compared to $179.2 million in 2019, a 14.4% increase.
Our non-GAAP earnings per share for the nine months were $0.63 compared to $0.55, which is a 14.5% increase.
As we stated on our Q1 and Q2 calls, we began aggressively purchasing personal protective equipment in March and April.
While these were costly, they were critical to keeping our operations running safely.
As the cost of these materials have moved lower from the peak, we took a $2 million onetime charge to revalue our inventory.
With pricing moving lower, we anticipate spending $1 million per quarter, down from the $2 million that we shared on previous calls.
At this time, we would anticipate having this additional expense through Q2 of 2021.
Let's take a look through the Rollins revenue by service lines for the third quarter.
Our total revenue increased 4.9%.
That included 1.4% from acquisitions and the remaining 3.5% was from pricing, which was a small portion of that, but mostly from organic and new customer growth.
In total, residential pest control, which made up 47% of our revenue, was up 10.5%; commercial, ex-fumigation pest control, which made up 34% of our revenue, was down 1.9%; and termite and ancillary services, which made up approximately 18% of our revenue, was up 6.2%.
Again, total revenue less acquisitions was up 3.5% and from that, residential was up 9%; commercial, ex-fumigation, decreased 3.7%; and termite and ancillary grew by 5.9%.
Our residential business continues to perform well.
And the business on the commercial side has seen steady improvement each month since April.
While we continue to manage our costs appropriately, it's difficult to know how the revenue levels will look as we move through the pandemic with restrictions continuing to change throughout the world.
In total, gross margin increased to 52.8% from 51.7% in the prior year's quarter.
The quarter was positively impacted by lower service and administrative salary expenses as well as lower fuel expense and continued improvements from our routing and scheduling efficiencies.
Additionally, materials and supplies were up, as I referenced, related to the inventory revaluation of our personal protective equipment.
Depreciation and amortization expenses for the quarter increased $714,000 to $22.4 million, an increase of 3.3%.
Depreciation increased $1 million due to acquisitions, vehicles acquired and equipment purchases, while amortization of intangible assets decreased $286,000 due to the full amortization of customer contracts from several acquisitions, including HomeTeam and tuck-ins related to Orkin.
Sales, general and administrative expenses for the third quarter increased $838,000 or 0.5% to $168 million or 28.8% of revenues, down from 30% last year.
The quarter produced savings in salaries and benefits, lower fuel and bad debt through better collection efforts.
As for our cash position for the 9-month period ended September 30, 2020, we spent $79.9 million on acquisitions compared to $431.2 million in the same period last year, which included the acquisition of Clark Pest Control.
We paid $91.7 million on dividends and had $17.7 million of capital expenditures, which was slightly lower compared to 2019.
We ended the period with $95.4 million in cash, of which $62.9 million is held by our foreign subsidiaries.
Before I close, I would like to give an update on one of our sustainability initiatives, particularly as it relates to our local communities.
Through corporate and brand initiatives, such as our Rollins United and Northwest Good Deeds Teams, Rollins employees across all brands are strongly encouraged to volunteer within our local communities.
In 2021, our employee volunteer goals include: community cleanup efforts, trafficking education awareness, literacy programs and support of the united way, to name a few.
Rollins is committed to giving back to our communities through a strong philanthropic vision.
Please go to rollins.com under the Investor Relations tab to view the full 2020 sustainability report.
Yesterday, the Board of Directors approved a large regular cash dividend of $0.08 per share plus a special dividend of $0.13 that will be paid on December 20, 2020, to stockholders of record at the close of business November 10, 2020.
In addition, they also announced a 3-for-2 stock split that will take effect December 10, 2020, for stockholders of record at the close of business on November 10, 2020.
