Before talking about our results, I want to express how concerned and focused we are regarding the spread of COVID-19.
We know many of you are experiencing the expansion of the virus in your communities and we hope you and your family are doing well and remain safe.
Now back to our second quarter.
Revenues for the quarter grew 5.6% to $553.3 million compared to $524 million for the same quarter in 2019.
Net income rose approximately 16.5% [Phonetic] to $74.9 million [Phonetic] or $0.23 per diluted shares, compared to $64 million or $0.20 per diluted shares for the second quarter of last year.
Revenues for the first six months of the year were $1.04 billion, an increase of 9.3% compared to $953 million for the same period last year.
Net income for the first six months increased 8.9% to $118.1 million [Phonetic] or $0.36 per diluted share compared to $0.33 per diluted share for the comparable period last year, a 9% increase.
Turning to our business lines results in the quarter.
Residential pest control grew an outstanding 14.8%.
Commercial, however, excluding fumigation, was down 5.2%.
We have offset some of those commercial revenue shortfalls with termite and ancillary service, which was up 7.3%.
Eddie will provide greater detail around these numbers.
During what we consider the most challenging time in our Company's history, our employees' efforts and contributions have been exceptional in every regard.
We couldn't be more grateful and proud of them in what they've done.
They truly are our most valuable asset.
We continue to be aware and involved to ensure their safety and good health.
They are provided with personal protection as needed as they go about servicing our customers.
Most of our technicians are working remotely and avoiding spacing issues that would exist their coming into our branch offices.
The majority of our home office and call center employees are also working remotely.
Our commitment to safe practices involves our valued customers as well.
On the plus side, most of our residential customers have been at home 24/7 and they are becoming even more conscious of their home and, in some cases, the need to protect their family and property from unwanted pests.
Additionally as families self quarantine, many are spending more time in their yards, recognizing the need for mosquito control.
We are benefiting from the high regard, trust and confidence that our customers have in our brands, which is in part responsible for our fast-growing pest control revenue and our gain in new customers, all at record setting rates.
Before turning the call over to John, I want to note while we were pleased with the results for the quarter, we continue to face the challenges of the pandemic and the unknowns that go with it.
As a result, we review and adjust our activities and policies routinely to help us better address the impact of COVID-19.
As I mentioned, commercial pest control unfortunately has been more impacted by the virus and its related economic circumstances.
However, we've been narrowing the revenue shortfall gap each month since March.
Anecdotally, we are seeing a growing realization at many businesses that they can't shut down pest control services for an extended period of time without having infestation consequences.
A worthwhile offset to these commercial pest control challenges has been our other brands and introduction of our disinfectant service, VitalClean.
As a result of this new service development prior to the pandemic, we have the ability to roll out our related sales and service protocols quickly.
VitalClean is gaining traction and we would expect it to be more significant contributor to our commercial revenue going forward.
I would like to echo the commentary Gary made earlier about our team members.
A common theme worldwide was their unbelievable response to this pandemic and their commitment to their customers throughout this event.
As the pandemic started, we saw firsthand the trust that our customers have in our highly reputable brands and service professionals.
Additionally, we quickly moved to outfit our field teams with personal protective gear that help keep them safe as well as give our customers confidence in our ability to service their pest needs responsibly.
Without the response we received from our outstanding team members, our customers would have been left unprotected from many insect and rodent caused health threats.
As we noted last quarter, Orkin and many of our other brands are now offering a disinfection service which quickly and thoroughly eliminates a wide variety of serious pathogens.
Comprehensive disinfection is imperative to keeping an establishment as sterile as possible and disease-free.
During the second quarter, we were very delighted to see the positive reception this service is receiving from our commercial customers.
I was especially pleased at a wide-ranging movement from our field teams to provide this service [Indecipherable] to hundreds of first responder locations, police stations, fire houses and hospitals.
As the economy slowly opens and more commercial businesses begin welcoming back their patrons for indoor dining, shopping or as guests in their hotels and as their employees go back to the various workplaces, we expect the demand for VitalClean services to continue to grow.
We are pleased with the progress thus far and very excited about the potential for this opportunity.
Our call centers were very busy during the second quarter as reflected in our increased residential sales.
The record book for performance was completely rewritten as our inbound telephone sales effort replaced seven of the top 10 sales days in our history.
From what we are currently experiencing, we are optimistic that these results will continue into the third quarter as July performance certainly reflects that as the remaining three top 10 sales days have been replaced.
Last, we continue to expand our Company's presence both in the US and globally, having made second quarter acquisitions in Australia and the UK.
On July 1, we announced one of our Australian subsidiaries had acquired the largest independent pest control company in Australia, Adams Pest Control.
This acquisition solidifies Rollins' national coverage in Australia.
Adams Pest founded by John Adams and established in 1944 has expertise in all aspects of general pests and wildlife control and is the market leader in the Greater Melbourne and Adelaide areas.
In the United Kingdom we also acquired two environmentally friendly companies, Albany Environmental Services based in Central London and Van Vynck Environmental Services in Essex.
These latest acquisitions bring our presence to seven companies covering all the UK.
Today, I'll share some details on our Q2 actual results and some additional insight to what we know today that will impact the future.
During the entirety of the second quarter, our operations have remarkably navigated all that we as a society have dealt with related to the economic and health impacts of the virus.
Additionally, our non-field operation groups successfully switched to a remote work model and did not miss a beat with their support.
As you can see from the outcome, their collective results and efforts have been outstanding.
From a reporting perspective, please also keep in mind that we lapped our initial Clark acquisition on May 1st and we will see much more normalized financial results for the quarter and the foreseeable future.
For the quarter, our residential pest control and termite services lines showed growth and key to the quarter included higher material and supplies costs, which included the purchase of personal protective equipment, successful cost containment implemented to drive margin improvements year-over-year and provision set up for potential commercial customer bad debts.
Looking at the numbers, the second quarter revenue of $553.3 million was an increase of 5.6% over the prior year's second quarter revenue of $524 million.
Income before income taxes was $103.5 million or 19% above 2019.
Net income was $75.4 million, up 17.2% compared to last year.
Our GAAP earnings per share were $0.23 per diluted share.
EBITDA was $126.9 million and rose 16.4% compared to 2019.
Our Q2 numbers have begun to normalize again as we lapped the initial Clark acquisition in the quarter.
The first six months revenue of $1.041 billion was an increase of 9.3% over the prior year's first six months revenue of $953 million.
Income before income taxes was $158.9 million or 11.1% above last year.
Net income was $118.6 million, up 9.3% compared to 2019.
Our GAAP earnings per share were $0.36 per diluted share.
EBITDA was $206.1 million and rose 13.6% compared to 2019.
As we stated on our Q1 call, we began aggressively purchasing PP&E [Phonetic] in March and in April.
This along with the transition to new, more diversified vendors impacted our materials and supplies costs between $2 million and $3 million in Q2 and will impact the business in a similar manner for the remainder of the year.
Let's take a look through the Rollins revenue by service lines for the second quarter.
As Gary reviewed, our total revenue increase of 5.6% included 3.1% from Clark and other acquisitions and the remaining 2.5% was from pricing and organic growth.
In total residential pest control, which made up 47% of our revenue, was up 14.8%, commercial pest control, ex fumigation, which made up 33% of our revenue was down 5.2% and termite and ancillary services, which made up approximately 20% of our revenue, was up 7.3%.
Also of note, our wildlife services were up strong double digits yet again this quarter.
Again, total revenue less acquisitions was up 2.5% and from that residential was up 10.3%, commercial, ex fumigation, decreased 7.8% and termite and ancillary grew by 5.5%.
As John mentioned in his remarks, but I also want to recognize our call centers that made the transition to working remotely and then went on to set numerous revenue and sales records, which helped drive our residential growth.
Both Gary and John discussed the trust of our customers during the quarter.
Our investment in PP&E also helped our customers to show trust in our well-known brands.
Seeing their technicians or salesperson in full PP&E gave a comfort that we also had the customer safety top of mind.
Our feedback from customers shared on our NPS score for our residential product showed 2.4 percentage points higher than last year, which included a new COVID-19 category.
This data was further supported by significantly better Google reviews and Facebook recommendations.
Marketing has supported our ops very well to gain these insights.
In total, gross margin increased to 53.8% from 51.7% in the prior year's quarter.
The quarter was positively impacted by our lower salary expense in the areas of company furloughs, layoffs and salary reductions as well as lower fuel expense and continued improvements from our routing and scheduling initiatives.
Additionally materials and supplies were up, as discussed earlier.
Depreciation and amortization expenses for the quarter increased $1.8 million to $21.9 million, an increase of 8.9%.
Depreciation increased $1 million due to acquisitions, vehicles acquired and equipment purchases, while amortization of intangible assets increased $754,000 due to the amortization of customer contracts from several acquisitions, including Clark.
Sales, general and administrative expenses for the second quarter increased $9.4 million, or 5.8%, to $171.3 million, or 30.9% of revenues, which was flat to last year.
The quarter produced savings in salaries and benefits, lower fuel, discretionary savings but was offset with a higher reserve set for our anticipated bad debt primarily from our commercial customers due to COVID-19.
Our commercial business is a mirror to the general economy around the world.
While many of our commercial pest control customers are paying at a slower rate than normal, they are still paying.
Based on what we know at this time, we feel that we have adequately reserved for those customers that may not be in business on the other side of the pandemic.
Our cash flow continues to be strong and at this time we have no changes to our capital allocation plans.
As our top priority, we've continued with our M&A activity around the globe.
As John mentioned, we completed several acquisitions in the quarter and have plans for more in the future.
During the quarter, we more aggressively paid down our debt and are now on track to have this retired in late 2021.
As for our cash position for the period ended June 30th, 2020, we spent $56 million on acquisitions, compared to $410.1 million in the same period last year, which included Clark.
We paid $65.5 million on dividends and had $12.4 million of capex, which was slightly lower compared to 2019.
We ended the period with $134.8 million in cash of which $73.2 million is held by our foreign subsidiaries.
Before I close, I want to share that we have released our first ever sustainability report for 2019.
We've taken the opportunity to highlight some of the things that we have going on in the areas of the environment, social and governance.
The report has been posted on our website and we look forward to building on these areas as a company as we move through 2020 and beyond.
Yesterday, the Board of Directors approved a temporary reduction of the regular cash dividend to $0.08 per share that will be paid on September 10th, 2020 to stockholders of record at the close of business on August 10th, 2020.
