Yesterday, our Board of Directors appointed Julie Bimmerman, who many of you know, as our interim Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer.
Eddie Northern has been moved into an operational role as Senior Vice President focused on sustainability.
She has been with us since 2004, having most recently been Vice President of Finance and Investor Relations.
Prior to joining Rollins, Julie worked in corporate accounting, internal audit and corporate tax audit role.
She's known to many of you already and she will be available to analysts and institutional investors after the call as per usual.
Now to the exciting news.
I'm very pleased to report that Rollins delivered a strong financial performance in the second quarter, and we remain well positioned for 2021.
John will share with you our recent additions to our Board of Directors, while Jerry and Julie will give you details of our financial results shortly.
These results were made possible by the continued dedication and contribution of our incredible field and corporate teams.
We truly appreciate their customer focus that has generated a significantly higher than normal growth and profitability so far in 2021.
Over the past year, we have enhanced and diversified Rollins' Board of Directors with several new additions.
I'd like to spend a moment today welcoming our two newest Board members, Gregory Morrison and Donald Carson.
Don, having worked for many years in investment in commercial banking, including Wachovia Bank, brings a high level of knowledge and strategic financial transactions to the company.
We're thrilled to add these individuals to the outstanding group of leaders on our Board, and we look forward to their counsel and contributions to our company.
As Orkin begins their 120th year of service, we thought it was an opportune time to spend a few minutes highlighting some of the recent successes of the brand.
For those who have followed us over the years, you may recall that Orkin was acquired by Rollins in 1964 and as the original company, that first started our venture into pest control.
Today, Orkin remains our largest brand, employing over 8,000 team members and completing millions of services annually worldwide.
Orkin is very involved in the communities they serve, maintaining a strong commitment to education, public health and environmental responsibility.
From collaborations with the centers for disease control and prevention and major universities to their work with the National Science Teachers Association, Orkin fosters a deeper understanding and appreciation of the natural world around us.
As we have previously shared with you over the past few years, Orkin has adopted new technologies, which has improved communications with customers, optimized routing and scheduling and increased technician efficiencies to name a few.
Through the years, Orkin has grown adding both new customers and new customer service offerings like bed bug, flea and tick, mosquito and most recently, VitalClean, our service designed to fight COVID-19.
Overall, Orkin has significantly contributed to the long-term success of Rollins.
As Gary mentioned earlier, we're very pleased with our results for the second quarter.
Revenue increased 15.3% to $63.2 million compared to $553.3 million for the second quarter of last year.
Net income grew to $98.9 million, or $0.20 per diluted share, compared to $75.4 million, or $0.15 per diluted share, for the same period in 2020.
Julie will review the GAAP and non-GAAP results shortly.
For the quarter, we experienced solid growth in all our business lines with residential increasing 13.6% and termite, 16.3% over second quarter 2020.
Additionally, commercial, excluding fumigation, delivered an impressive 17.4% growth over second quarter last year.
This is also an improvement of 11.3% growth over two years ago when we weren't experiencing COVID-related shutdowns.
As you may recall, last year, we thought it was prudent to forgo our annual price increase during the pandemic.
Now encouraged by the economic recovery that's underway, we have rolled out our 2021 annual price increases at all our brands.
Implemented at the end of the second quarter, we expect that we will see the benefits of these increases as we move throughout the remainder of the year.
Additionally, we're especially pleased with our commercial pest control growth, which has not only benefited from the economy reopening, but also from our InSite commercial technology.
Through the use of InSite, Orkin's web reporting tool, our commercial customers have the ability to monitor pest activity and treatments within their facilities, reduce service tickets and receive specific pest alert notifications.
This allows for quality assurance checks to be easily completed at the customer level.
It also gives the customer the ability to produce timely reporting as necessary for regulatory or third-party audits.
We get great feedback from customers on InSite and are confident that this feature will strengthen our relationships with commercial clients.
Overall, we've made strong progress during the first six months of 2021.
And as we look ahead, we are confident in our ability to continue driving growth and profitability in our business.
At Rollins, we are constantly looking for ways to improve in all areas of our business.
As many of you know, continuous improvement is an important part of our culture.
We have a lot of opportunity for the remainder of 2021.
But I would like to recognize that the significant financial gains from this quarter are on top of the strong gains that we experienced during 2020.
Even as we were all entering a different economic time back in Q2 of last year, our revenue grew at a steady 5.6%.
That was converted into net income growth of 17.2%.
Both of these 2020 numbers were at or above our historic averages.
So for the second quarter 2021, as Jerry noted, all business lines presented strong revenue growth.
Keys to the quarter included pricing strength, positively impacting revenue growth, continued mosquito service revenue improvement over 30% and commercial pest control revenue improving significantly.
Additionally, for the first time, our mosquito service revenue has surpassed our bedbug revenue in this quarter was over 3% of our total revenue.
Looking at the numbers.
The second quarter revenues of $638.2 million was an increase of 15.3% over the prior year's second quarter revenue of $553.3 million.
Our income before income taxes was $133.9 million, or 29.4% above 2020.
Our net income was $98.9 million, up 31.2% compared to 2020.
Our earnings per share were $0.20 per diluted share compared to $0.15 in 2020, or a 33.3% increase.
As a reminder, we reported both GAAP and non-GAAP financials for the first quarter of 2021.
The non-GAAP results were positively impacted by our gain on sales of several of our properties.
For the first six months of 2021, revenues were $1.174 billion, which was an increase of 12.7% over the prior year's first six months revenue of $1.014 billion.
Our GAAP income before income taxes was $253.8 million, or 59.7% above 2020.
Our GAAP net income was $191.5 million, or 61.4%, compared to 2020.
Our GAAP earnings per share or earnings per were $0.39 per diluted share compared to $0.24 per diluted share in 2020.
Overall, like some companies that were negatively impacted by the pandemic, demand in most areas of our business in both 2020 and 2021 was strong.
We maintained consistent revenue growth of 5.6% in 2020, followed by a healthy increase of 15.3% in 2021.
It does not seem that pent-up demand or stimulus checks have impacted our residential revenue growth, but rather a new awareness of pest needs based on more time spent at the home.
It would be difficult to predict what these new demand levels will look like in the future, but we remain optimistic.
Our total revenue increased for the quarter, up 15.3% and included 1.7% from significant acquisitions with the remaining 13.6% from pricing and new customer growth.
Residential pest control made up 40% of our revenue; commercial pest control, 33%; and termite and other services made up approximately 21% of our revenue.
In addition, our wildlife service continued to see strong double-digit growth.
Again, total revenue less significant acquisitions, was up 13.6%.
From that, residential was up 12.3%; commercial, excluding fumigation, increased 14.8%; and termite and ancillary grew by 14.9%.
In total, our gross margin decreased to 53.3% from 53.8% in the prior year's quarter.
Improvements were made in total payroll but were negatively offset by higher overall fleet costs and a write-down of inventory of $2.7 million related to our PPE, or personal protective equipment.
We will continue to assess our fluctuating future needs and market value for our PPE in the coming quarters.
In addition to our continued Orkin U.S. mileage savings, our Orkin Canada and Western Pest brands are making progress regarding their BOSS and routing and scheduling implementation.
Each company has improved their on-day and on-time delivery since the project started.
These savings will help support improvements in our overall fleet cost in the future quarters.
Depreciation and amortization expenses for the quarter increased $1.4 million to $23.3 million, an increase of 6.3%.
Amortization of intangible assets increased $1.3 million due to several acquisitions, including McCall Service in December 2020 and Adams Pest in Australia in July of last year.
Sales, general and administrative expenses presented a 7.1% improvement for the quarter over 2020, decreasing from 30.9% of revenues to 28.7% of revenues in 2021.
The quarter produced savings in administrative and sales salaries and benefits as well as telephone savings from better negotiated contracts.
As for our cash position, for the six months ending 6/30/2021, we spent $28.4 million on acquisitions compared to $56 million in the same period last year.
We paid $79.7 million on dividends and had $13.2 million of capex compared to $12.4 million in 2020.
We ended the period with $128.5 million in cash, of which $73.6 million is held by our foreign subsidiaries.
As part of our continuous improvement that I mentioned in my opening, we have lots of opportunity in the future in this area, but we are proud of this recognition by the industry.
Yesterday, the Board of Directors approved a regular cash dividend of $0.08 per share that will be paid on September 10, 2021, to stockholders of record at the close of business August 10, 2021.
