With that, I will now turn things over to Mike.
I want to discuss a few highlights of our third quarter results before turning it back to Shantanu, who will review them in detail.
Turning to our financial performance in the quarter, we are pleased with how our teams delivered across both the coke and logistics segments.
cokemaking operations continued to operate at full capacity, while our Logistics segment delivered another solid quarter, despite the disruption caused by Hurricane Ida.
For the third quarter of 2021, we delivered adjusted EBITDA of $73.9 million, representing record third quarter performance.
As I mentioned, CMT operations were disrupted due to Hurricane Ida, but the terminal recovered quickly with only minor damage and minimum business disruption.
The resilient nature of our operations and commitment to our employees was clearly visible through the speed at which CMT returned to normal operations.
Operationally, our export and foundry coke initiatives continued to perform well as evident from our financial results.
In addition, positive market dynamics are proving that our entry into these markets was timely.
Our products are well received by customers and we have established ourselves as a reliable supplier of quality products in both markets.
Our gross leverage stands at approximately 2.5 times on a trailing 12-month adjusted EBITDA basis.
We are committed to continue paying down our revolver for the remainder of the year.
Based on our year-to-date performance and the expectation of continued strength in steel and coal markets for the remainder of the year, we are well positioned to modestly exceed our full-year 2021 adjusted EBITDA guidance of $255 million to $265 million.
Turning to Slide four, our third quarter net income attributable to SXC was $0.27 per share, up $0.30 versus the prior year period.
The increase is primarily driven by the absence of supply relief provided to certain customers as part of the turned down agreements during the prior year period.
Adjusted EBITDA came in at $73.9 million for the quarter, up $26.1 million from the prior year quarter.
Our coke operations continue to deliver strong performance and operate efficiently.
Overall, coke operations were up $17.7 million over prior year period.
Turning to the Domestic Coke business summary on Slide five.
Third quarter adjusted EBITDA per ton was $62 on 1,056,000 sales tons.
The volumes were higher across the fleet as the prior-year period was impacted by pandemic-related turn downs.
Our successful entry into export and foundry market is proving to be timely and when combined with full capacity utilization, we can see the positive impact on our profitability.
We expect full-year Domestic Coke adjusted EBITDA to come in modestly higher than the guidance range of $234 million to $238 million.
There are planned outages at some of our Domestic Coke facilities, which will impact the volume and profitability of fourth quarter, but is included in the full-year guidance.
Moving to Slide six to discuss our Logistics business.
The Logistics business generated $11.6 million of adjusted EBITDA during the third quarter of 2021, as compared to $4.3 million in the prior year period.
The increase is driven by higher coal volumes, addition of iron ore as a product and higher price on coal handling all at CMT. The coal handling contract includes a quarterly price adjustment or a price kicker, which is based on the API2 price index, which benefited Q3 results.
We expect the benefit to continue in Q4, as well.
As mentioned by Mike earlier, the impact of Hurricane Ida on CMT was limited and the facility came back to normal operating levels fairly quickly.
The segment as a whole handled 4.9 million tons of throughput volumes during the quarter, as compared to 3.3 million tons during the prior year period.
Our full-year guidance for Logistics volumes and adjusted EBITDA remains the same as provided in second quarter.
Turning to Slide seven to discuss our liquidity position in Q3.
As you can see from the chart, we ended the third quarter with a cash balance of $54.6 million.
In the third quarter, cash flow from the operating activities generated close to $79 million.
We spent $18.4 million on capex during the quarter and paid dividends of $5 million at the rate of $0.06 per share.
We lowered our debt by $51.7 million with the majority of the reduction coming in the form of paydown of our revolving credit facility.
Our total debt balance stood at approximately $615 million at the end of third quarter and we expect to continue to pay down the revolver over the balance of the year.
In total, we ended the quarter with a strong liquidity position of $291 million.
Wrapping up on Slide eight.
As always, safety and operational performance is top of mind for our organization.
We look to continue to perform safely, while successfully executing against our operating and capital plan for the remainder of the year.
We are very pleased with the progress we have made so far in the new markets we entered this year and we will continue to focus on further developing our customer base and participation in future years.
Our aim, when we started 2021, was to run at full capacity, while introducing new products.
As we end the third quarter, we are fully booked for the balance of the year and we are actively working on filling the order book for next year.
On the Logistics side, we have made good progress on revitalizing CMT with the backdrop of positive market dynamics.
We will continue to build on this foundation for CMT's long-term success.
On the capital allocation front, we will continue to work toward reducing our revolver for the balance of the year.
In the longer term, we will continually evaluate the capital needs of our business, profitable growth opportunities and the need to reward our shareholders, and we'll make capital allocation decisions accordingly.
Finally, based on reliable performance of our operating segments and success of export and foundry products, we are well positioned to modestly exceed our adjusted EBITDA guidance of $255 million to $265 million for 2021.
With that, let's go ahead and open it up for Q&A.
