Before we begin, I'd like to mention we will be discussing future estimates and expectations during our call today.
On the call today, we have Scott Donnelly, Textron's chairman and CEO; and Frank Connor, our chief financial officer.
Revenues in the quarter were $3 billion, up from $2.7 billion in last year's third quarter.
During this year's third quarter, we reported income from continuing operations of $0.82 per share.
Adjusted income from continuing operations, a non-GAAP measure, was $0.85 per share for the third quarter of 2021, compared to $0.53 per share in the third quarter of 2020.
Segment profit in the quarter was $279 million, up $90 million from the third quarter of 2020.
Manufacturing cash flow before pension contributions totaled $271 million in the quarter and $851 million year-to-date.
We continue to execute well across the company in the quarter.
At Aviation, we continue to see a solid recovery in the general aviation market with strong commercial demand, increased deliveries in Citation jets and commercial turboprops and higher aftermarket volume.
We delivered 49 jets, up from 25 last year and 35 commercial turboprops, up from 21 in last year's third quarter.
Order activity in the quarter remained very strong, resulting in backlog growth of $721 million bringing us to $3.5 billion at the quarter end.
Also in the third quarter, the Beechcraft King Air 360 and 260 achieved EASA certification and began to deliver customers throughout the region.
Continuing with our product strategy of upgrading existing models at NBAA, we recently announced the Citation M2 Gen2 and the XLS Gen2 product upgrades.
Also on the new product front, such as SkyCourier is continuing to progress through certification with over 1,600 hours of flight test activity and the Beechcraft Denali successfully completed its initial ground engine runs powered by GE's new Catalyst engine.
The Bell revenues were down 3% in the quarter, largely on lower military revenues.
On the commercial side of Bell, we delivered 33 helicopters down from 41 in last year's third quarter.
Moving to future vertical lift.
In September, Bell submitted its proposal for the FARA program, a downselecting award is expected in the second quarter of 2022.
On FARA, Bell is about 60% of the way through its build of the 360 Invictus prototype remains on schedule.
Also in the quarter, Bell inducted the first U.S. Air Force CV-22 for its nacelle improvement modifications.
We saw another strong quarter of execution with operating margins at 15.1%, up 190 basis points from last year's third quarter.
ATAC continued to expand its fleet of certified F1 aircraft with two additional aircraft entering service in the quarter bringing the total fleet to 19 aircrafts at the end of the quarter.
The fleet continues to support higher customer demand for adversary air services, driving higher revenues in the quarter.
At Air Systems, the team booked $25 million in new orders in the quarter, including both fee-for-service activities, as well as new hardware.
Moving to Industrial, overall revenues were lower in the quarter as we continue to experience manufacturing disruptions related to supply chain challenges.
In Kautex, we again saw order disruptions related to the global auto OEM supply chain shortages, which have directly impacted production scheduling and resulting in intermittent line shutdowns of manufacturing efficiencies.
At Specialized Vehicles, we saw continued strong demand in our end markets with higher pricing, which offset production disruptions from part shortages.
To wrap up, Textron delivered a solid quarter with increased aviation backlog, improved manufacturing margins and continued strong cash generation while working to minimize the impact of supply chain disruptions.
Let's review how each of the segments contributed, starting with Textron Aviation.
Revenues at Textron Aviation of $1.2 billion were up $386 million from a year ago, largely due to higher Citation jet volume of $290 million, aftermarket volume of $62 million and commercial turboprop volume of $48 million.
Segment profit was $98 million in the third quarter, up $127 million from a year ago, largely due to the higher volume and mix of $96 million and favorable pricing net of inflation of $22 million.
Backlog in the segment ended the quarter at $3.5 billion.
Revenues were $769 million, down $24 million from last year, largely reflecting lower military revenues.
Segment profit of $105 million was down $14 million primarily due to lower military revenues.
Backlog in the segment ended the quarter at $4.1 billion.
At Textron Systems, revenues were $299 million, down $3 million from last year's third quarter due to lower volume of $39 million at Air Systems, which primarily reflected the impact from the U.S. Army's withdrawal from Afghanistan on its fee-for-service contracts, partially offset by higher volume, primarily at ATAC and Electronic Systems.
Segment profit of $45 million was up $5 million to a favorable impact from performance and other.
Backlog in the segment ended the quarter at $2.2 billion.
Industrial revenues were $730 million, down $102 million from last year, reflecting lower volume and mix of $156 million primarily at Fuel Systems and Functional Components, reflecting order disruptions related to the global OEM supply shortages, partially offset by favorable impact of $44 million from pricing, largely at Specialized Vehicles.
Segment profit of $23 million was down $35 million from the third quarter of 2020, primarily due to the lower volume and mix described above, partially offset by higher pricing net of inflation at Specialized Vehicles.
Finance segment revenues of $11 million -- were $11 million and profit was $8 million.
Moving below segment profit.
Corporate expenses were $23 million and interest expense was $28 million.
With respect to our 2020 restructuring plan, we recorded pre-tax charges of $10 million on the special charges line.
Our manufacturing cash flow before pension contributions was $271 million in the quarter and $851 million year-to-date, as compared to $129 million for the corresponding nine-month period in 2020.
Year-to-date, our cash generation reflects improved working capital management, which includes more linearity in quarterly aircraft deliveries and higher customer deposits in Aviation from an increased backlog.
In the quarter, we repurchased approximately 4.2 million shares, returning $299 million in cash to shareholders.
We're raising our expected full year guidance for adjusted earnings per share to a range of $3.20 to $3.30 per share.
This includes revised tax guidance at effective rate of 15.5% for the full year.
We're also raising our outlook for manufacturing cash flow before pension contributions to a range of $1 billion to $1.1 billion, up $200 million from our prior outlook, with planned pension contributions of $50 million.
