Speaking on the call today will be Tom Meissner, Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer; and Bob Hevert, Senior Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer.
Moving to Slide 2.
Statements made on the call should be considered together with cautionary statements in other information contained in our most recent Annual Report on Form 10-K and other documents we have filed with or furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The accompanying supplemental information more fully describes these non-GAAP financial measures and includes a reconciliation to the nearest GAAP financial measures.
The company believes these non-GAAP financial measures are useful in evaluating its performance.
I'm going to begin on Slide 4 today.
So, today we're pleased to announce net income of $2.7 million or $0.18 per share for the second quarter of 2021.
For the first half of 2021, net income was $21.6 million or $1.44 per share.
This represents an increase of $0.21 per share over the same six-months period of 2020 and reflects higher Electric and Gas adjusted gross margins.
Next, I'd like to quickly review a few high level themes.
First, we reiterate our long-term guidance of 5% to 7% growth in earnings per share with 2021 earnings expected to be somewhat above the higher end of the range relative to 2020.
Second, the company recently announced a goal of achieving net zero emissions by 2050.
This announcement is a major step for the company and reflects our commitment to environmental stewardship and corporate responsibility.
Finally, I would also like to note the filing of another strategic rate case in New Hampshire for our gas utility, Northern Utilities.
Combined, the pending rate applications for Unitil Energy Systems and Northern Utilities request a nearly $20 million increase in base distribution revenues.
Bob will discuss the details of these filings later in the call.
Moving to Slide 5.
As I noted earlier, on June 21, we announced our goal to reduce companywide direct greenhouse gas emissions by at least 50% by 2030 relative to 2019 levels and to achieve net zero emissions by 2050.
These goals are part of our overall commitment to environmental stewardship, sustainability and corporate responsibility.
As I've said before, our vision is to transform the way people meet their evolving energy needs to create a clean and sustainable future.
We will continue to work with customers, policy makers and industry leaders to reduce emissions from the energy supply delivered to our customers.
With that, I'll now pass it over to Bob, who will provide further detail on our financial results.
I will begin on Slide 6.
As Tom noted today, we announced second quarter earnings per share of $0.18.
This represents a year-over-year decrease of $0.4 million or $0.03 per share.
On a year-to-date basis, net income increased by $3.3 million or $0.21 per share compared to 2020.
Strong year-over-year earnings growth primarily is the result of higher Electric and Gas adjusted gross margins, partially offset by higher operating expenses.
As Tom mentioned, we expect full year 2021 earnings to be ahead of our 5% to 7% long-term earnings per share growth range relative to 2020 earnings of $2.15 per share.
Turning to Slide 7.
For the six months ended June 30, 2021, Electric adjusted gross margin was $48 million, an increase of $2.5 million or 5.5% relative to 2020.
The increase in Electric adjusted gross margin reflects higher residential unit sales of 2.8% and higher commercial and industrial unit sales of 3.1%.
Customers increased 0.8% over the first half of 2020.
The higher sales volumes reflect customer growth and improving economic conditions.
As noted on Slide 8, for the six months ended June 30, 2021, Gas adjusted gross margin was $72.8 million, an increase of $7.5 million or 11.5% compared to 2020.
The increase in Gas adjusted gross margin reflects higher rates of $5.1 million and the combined net effect of $2.4 million from the net favorable effect of customer growth, colder winter weather and warmer spring weather.
The first half of 2021 was 2.1% colder year-over-year, contributing to higher natural gas therm sales of 4.2%.
Higher sales also reflect 1,200 additional customers served compared to the same period in 2020.
Moving on to Slide 9.
We provide an earnings bridge comparing 2021 results to 2020 for the quarter.
As noted earlier, 2021 adjusted gross margin increased $10 million as a result of higher rates and higher unit sales.
Operating and maintenance expenses increased $2 million.
The current year increase is attributable to higher utility operating costs, higher labor costs and higher professional fees.
In the second quarter of 2020, the company realized a benefit from lower labor costs related to the COVID pandemic.
As the economies in our service area recover, we have seen that trend reverse, primarily in the area of healthcare.
The increase in operating expenses also includes an increase of $0.4 million or roughly $0.02 per share related to a recent decision by the New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission's not to authorize the creation of a regulatory asset for incremental bad debt related to the COVID pandemic.
Instead the order states these costs will be addressed in each utilities' next rate case.
Unitil is in a unique position in that we have pending both Electric and Gas rate cases in New Hampshire through which we will seek recovery of those costs.
Depreciation and amortization increased by $2.7 million, reflecting higher levels of utility plant in service.
Taxes, other than income taxes, decreased by $0.2 million, primarily due to lower payroll taxes, partially offset by higher local property taxes on higher utility plant in service.
Interest expense increased by $0.9 million, reflecting interest on higher long-term debt balances, partially offset by lower rates on lower levels of short-term borrowings.
Other expense decreased by $0.5 million, largely due to lower retirement benefit and other costs.
Lastly, income taxes increased by $1.8 million as a result of higher pre-tax earnings.
Turning now to Slide 10.
The Unitil Energy rate case, which I've discussed on previous calls, is progressing as expected with temporary rates of $4.5 million becoming effective on June 1.
Yesterday, we filed a multi-year rate plan in New Hampshire for our gas utility, Northern Utilities.
In that case, we proposed a $7.8 million rate base increase with a $3.2 million temporary rate increase.
You may recall that in New Hampshire, it is typical to collect a portion of the revenue deficiency through temporary rates prior to receiving a final order.
We anticipate temporary rates for Unitil -- excuse me, for Northern Utilities to become effective in the third quarter of 2021.
Temporary rates are reconciled to the final rate case award and the difference is collected or refunded usually over a one-year period.
Our filing also includes a full revenue per customer decoupling proposal and a multi-year rate plan to recover certain capital expenses made in 2021, 2022 and 2023.
We anticipate that these rate case filings in New Hampshire will support the return on equity at Unitil Energy Systems and Northern Utilities.
Wrapping up with Slide 11.
With the first half of 2021 behind us, we're pleased with what the company has accomplished.
At this time, we believe our investment plan for 2021 is on track and our regulatory initiatives are proceeding on schedule.
We look forward to providing further updates on our next call.
