On Slide 4 is our safe harbor statement.
These statements are based on our beliefs and assumptions, current expectations, estimates, and forecasts.
The company's future results are influenced by many factors beyond the control of the company.
During today's call, management will make reference to non-GAAP financial measures, including organic sales growth, adjusted operating profit, adjusted operating profit margin, and adjusted diluted EPS.
We will start on Slide 5.
Our team delivered an incredibly strong third quarter.
Our proven market-led strategy delivered double-digit growth across all three market units and geographies.
And excluding positive impact from sales related to the pandemic, we delivered double-digit growth in our base business with continued strong adoption of our high-value products, coupled with solid execution and leveraging our global operating model, it has led to robust margin expansion and earnings per share growth for the quarter.
Our Q3 performance was made possible by the commitment of the West team members across the globe.
We are in the business of helping our customers bring new medicines and treatments that improve the lives of patients.
I'm very proud and humble of how we live our purpose by producing billions of components and devices each quarter.
And we do so with the knowledge that each and every component we make is impacting patients' life.
We continue to fulfill our purpose by earning our customers' trust by leading with quality, service, and science.
Looking ahead, we are well-positioned with the right growth strategy.
Our committed order book remains robust.
We continue to capture the benefits of the globalization of our operating network and continued capital investments to support the increasing demand driven by the pandemic and attractive end markets.
With this substantial momentum, we are raising our sales and earnings per share guidance for the full year 2021.
And for the 29th consecutive year, we are increasing the company's dividend, Bernard will go into greater detail shortly.
Turning to Slide 6.
Our key drivers of growth in Q3 are being fueled by COVID-19 customers that are used in our stoppers and seals including the highest level of NovaPure and FluroTec.
Biologic customers that are shifting preference from FluroTec to our premium platform, NovaPure, to achieve the highest quality and tightest specifications for their newly approved biologic drugs.
And pharma and generic customers, there are increasing orders as their demand grows for non-COVID-19 vaccines and injectable drugs.
Shifting to our device portfolio and our long-standing partnership with Daikyo Seiko, we continue to see adoption and uptick of customer interest for new pipeline drugs with Crystal Zenith syringes, cartridges, and vials.
To meet this demand and stay ahead of the current growth trends for future approvals, we have continued to add manufacturing capacity for CZ.
Our teams have successfully validated additional lines for insert needle syringes and will begin producing commercial product by the end of the year.
All these products as well as other HVP components are contributing to our growing book of committed orders, which position us well for the remainder of the year and into 2022 and beyond.
Moving to Slide 7.
To date, we have been leveraging our global infrastructure and tapping into the agility of our own team to meet the increased customer orders.
As we highlighted in Q2, several phases of investment are proceeding and now being realized.
Since the onset of the pandemic, we have expanded capacity at 13 existing sites with 30 major facility modifications, dedicated over $300 million of capital, and added over 400 incremental pieces of equipment, all while keeping pace with a growing base demand and moving our operations to 24/7.
As our book of committed orders continues to surge, we will continue to make further strategic investments to meet demand.
Today, we're announcing a fourth phase of capacity expansion that will commence in 2022.
This will primarily focus on expanding NovaPure production at our HVP sites in the United States and Europe.
Shifting to the rapidly changing environment and the impact of COVID-19 on the global supply chain, no industry has been immune to this impact.
We're working with our partners to help overcome challenges that span from transportation and logistics to raw materials and securing labor, all leading to cost inflation and delays.
Turning to Slide 8.
I'm proud of the significant progress we have made on our ESG priorities.
These have been an integral part of our One West culture and our commitment to all our stakeholders and the communities where we work and live.
Over the past six years, we continue to raise the bar in all aspects of our ESG initiatives.
And we remain on track to publish by year end, a supplement to our 2020 corporate responsibility report incorporating the SASB and TSFD ESG standards.
Let's review the numbers in more detail.
We'll first look at Q3 2021 revenues and profits where we saw continued strong sales and earnings per share growth led by strong revenue performance in our biologics, generics, and pharma market units.
I will take you through the margin growth we saw in the quarter as well as some balance sheet takeaways.
And finally, we will provide an update to our 2021 guidance.
Our financial results are summarized on Slide 9 and the reconciliation of non-U.S. GAAP measures are described on Slides 17 to 21.
We recorded net sales of $706.5 million, representing organic sales growth of 27.9%.
And COVID-related net revenues are estimated to have been approximately $115 million in the quarter.
These net revenues include our assessment of components associated with vaccines, treatments, and diagnosis of COVID-19 patients, offset by lower sales to customers affected by lower volumes due to the pandemic.
Looking at Slide 10.
Proprietary Products sales grew organically by 35.7% in the quarter.
High-value products, which made up approximately 73% of proprietary product sales in the quarter grew double digits and had solid momentum across all of our market units in Q3.
Looking at the performance of the market units, the biologics market unit delivered strong double-digit growth.
We continue to work with many biotech and biopharma customers who are using West and Daikyo high-value product offerings.
The generics market unit also experienced double-digit growth led by sales of FluroTec and Westar components.
Our pharma market unit also saw strong double-digit growth with sales led by high-value products including Westar, FluroTec, and NovaPure components.
And contract manufacturing had low single-digit organic sales growth for the third quarter, led once again by sales of healthcare-related medical devices.
We continue to see improvement in gross profit.
We recorded $288.2 million in gross profit, 93.6 million or 48.1% above Q3 of last year.
And our gross profit margin of 14.8% was a 530 basis point expansion from the same period last year.
We saw improvement in adjusted operating profit with $182.8 million recorded this quarter, compared to 103.9 million in the same period last year for a 75.9% increase.
Our adjusted operating profit margin, 25.9%, was a 690 basis point increase from the same period last year.
Finally, adjusted diluted earnings per share grew 79% for Q3.
Excluding stock-based compensation tax benefit of $0.11 in Q3, earnings per share grew by approximately 72%.
Let's review the growth drivers in both revenue and profit.
On Slide 11, we show the contributions to sales growth in the quarter.
Volume and mix contributed $142.9 million or 26.1 percentage points of growth, including approximately 83 million of incremental volume driven by COVID-19-related net demand.
Sales price increases contributed 10.1 million or 1.8 percentage points of growth.
Looking at margin performance.
Slide 19 shows our consolidated gross profit margin of 40.8% for Q3 2021, up 35.5% in Q3 2020.
Proprietary products third quarter gross profit margin of 46.3% was 550 basis points above the margin achieved in the third quarter of 2020.
The key drivers for continued improvement in Proprietary Products gross profit margin were favorable mix of products sold, driven by growth in high-value products, production efficiencies, and sales price increases, partially offset by increased overhead costs, inclusive of compensation.
Contract manufacturing third quarter gross profit margin of 16.1% was 180 basis points below the margin achieved in the quarter of 2020.
The decrease in margin is largely attributed to a mix of products sold as well as timing of the pass-through of raw material price increases to customers.
Now let's look at our balance sheet takeaway and review how we've done in terms of generating more cash for the business.
On Slide 13, we have listed some key cash flow metrics.
Operating cash flow was $423.2 million for the third quarter of 2021, an increase of 99.4 million compared to the same period last year, a 30.7% increase.
Operating cash flow in the period was adversely impacted by our working capital increase as well as timing of tax payments.
Our third quarter 2021 year-to-date capital spending was $176.9 million, $60.2 million higher than the same period last year.
Working capital of approximately $1 billion at September 30th, 2021 increased by 169.4 million from December 31, 2020, primarily due to higher accounts receivable from our increased sales.
Our cash balance at September 30th of $688 million was $72.5 million higher than our December 2020 balance.
The increase in cash is primarily due to our strong operating results in the period, offset by our share repurchase program and higher capex.
Slide 4 provides a high-level summary.
Full year 2021 net sales are expected to be in a range of 2.8 billion and $2.81 billion, compared to our prior guidance range of 2.76 billion to $2.785 billion.
This guidance includes estimated net coal with incremental revenues of approximately $450 million.
There is an estimated benefit of $55 million based on current foreign exchange rates, compared to a prior estimated benefit of $80 million.
This $25 million reduction in FX tailwind has been absorbed into our guidance.
We expect organic sales growth to be approximately 28%, compared to a prior range of 24 to 25%.
We expect our full year 2021 reported diluted earnings per share guidance to be in a range of $8.40 to $8.50, compared to a prior range of $8.05 to $8.20.
This revised guidance includes a $0.35 earnings per share positive impact of tax benefits from stock-based compensation from the first nine months 2021.
Also, our capex guidance remains at 265 to $275 million for the year.
There are some key elements I want to bring your attention to as we review our guidance.
Estimated FX benefit on earnings per share has an impact of approximately $0.19 based on current foreign currency exchange rates compared to a prior estimated benefit of $0.27.
And our guidance excludes future tax benefits from stock-based compensation.
To summarize the key takeaways for the third quarter, strong top line growth in proprietary gross profit margin improvement, growth in operating profit margin, growth in adjusted diluted EPS, and growth in operating cash flow, delivering in line with our pillars of execute, innovate, and grow.
To summarize on Slide 15, the excellent financial performance reported today continues to reaffirm that our strategy is working.
Our market-led approach is delivering unique value to our customers.
Our global operations team is efficiently manufacturing and delivering products in this complex environment with a focus on service and quality.
And we're continuing to accelerate capital spending across our operations to meet current and anticipated future growth.
Most importantly, we have an incredible team working to make this all happen.
We are proud to serve as a valuable trusted partner for customers to support patient health and look forward to continue to play a critical role in delivering healthcare well into the future.
Amanda, we're ready to take questions.
