the only significant update relates to the working capital usage for the year.
i will conclude with an update on certain items that will impact our p&l and cash flow for the remainder of year-six.
adjusted operating margins were num-one% and adjusted earnings per share was $num-two, each being the highest mark for any quarter for which we have available records.
we anticipate u.s. marine industry retail unit demand to grow mid-to-high single-digit percent versus year-five; net sales between $num-one billion and $num-two billion, adjusted operating margin growth between num-three and num-four basis points, operating expenses as a percent of sales to remain lower than year-five, free cash flow in excess of $num-five million; and adjusted diluted earnings per share in the range of $num-six to $num-seven.
we anticipate u.s. marine industry retail unit demand to grow mid-to-high single-digit percent versus year-five; net sales between $num-one billion and $num-two billion, adjusted operating margin growth between num-three and num-four basis points, operating expenses as a percent of sales to remain lower than year-five, free cash flow in excess of $num-five million; and adjusted diluted earnings per share in the range of $num-six to $num-seven.
mercury gained share in each horsepower category over num-one horsepower in the first quarter, with outsized gains in nodes in excess of num-two horsepower.
we're also providing directional guidance regarding the second quarter, where we anticipate revenue growth of approximately num-one% over the second quarter of year-five, with adjusted operating leverage in the low-num-txt percent.
please keep in mind that our actual results could differ materially from these expectations.
operating earnings were also positively impacted by the increased sales and the lower retail discount levels versus year-five.
as we look to the second half of the year, despite extremely challenging comparisons to year-five, we still believe that we will deliver top-line and earnings growth over the second half of last year.
just a reminder that while we will not be providing a full financial update during this event, ryan will be providing an abbreviated update on our year-seven financial targets, which will include further details regarding the substantial increase of our year-seven earnings per share target to between $num-one and $num-two per share as announced today.