our reported third quarter earnings per share was $num-one compared to $num-two in the third quarter of year-five.
our reported third quarter earnings per share was $num-one compared to $num-two in the third quarter of year-five.
for the full year, we now expect to deliver adjusted earnings per share of, at least, $num-one, and we expect the strong momentum to carry over into year-seven.
as greg mentioned in his remarks, taking into account our strong third quarter results and favorable market trends, we've increased our full year adjusted earnings per share from $num-one to $num-two.
adjusted earnings per share was $num-one in the third quarter versus $num-two in the prior year.
results in agribusiness were driven by strong execution and better than expected market environment.
for the full year, we now expect to deliver adjusted earnings per share of, at least, $num-one, and we expect the strong momentum to carry over into year-seven.
as greg mentioned in his remarks, taking into account our strong third quarter results and favorable market trends, we've increased our full year adjusted earnings per share from $num-one to $num-two.
we also repurchased $num-one million in shares and our board authorized a new $num-two million repurchase program, demonstrating our confidence in the business.
the $num-one million of share repurchases in the quarter completed our $num-two million authorization.
as greg mentioned earlier, bunge's board has authorized a new $num-one million program.
looking ahead, we expect favorable market conditions to continue and we're confident in our ability to capture the upside from opportunities while minimizing the downside.
this innovation capability as well as our skill at solving supply chain issues have helped create a step change in many long-term customer collaborations and commitments.
in agribusiness, results were expected to be up from our previous outlook and now forecasted to be higher than last year.
in non-core, full year results in the sugar and bioenergy joint venture are now expected to be up considerably from the prior year.
in refined & specialty oils, results are expected to be up from our previous outlook and well above last year.