a loss per share of $num-one was within our guidance range.
eps for the quarter was a loss of $num-one, in the middle of our guidance range.
a loss per share of $num-one was within our guidance range.
eps for the quarter was a loss of $num-one, in the middle of our guidance range.
our board of directors echoes this confidence and yesterday authorized an incremental $num-one million share repurchase program, underscoring our collective belief in big lots' positive growth story and our continued commitment to returning value to our shareholders.
we announced today that our board of directors has approved a new share repurchase authorization, providing for the repurchase of up to $num-one million of our common shares.
for the quarter, we expect diluted earnings per share in the range of $num-one to $num-two, compared to $num-three of earnings per diluted share for the fourth quarter of year-five and $num-four cents in qtr-four of year-four.
the decline versus year-five was driven by a comparable sales decrease of num-one%, in line with our negative mid single-digit comp guidance.
we expect the fourth quarter gross margin rate to be down around num-one basis points from last year and and also qtr-four year-four.
the decline versus year-five was driven by a comparable sales decrease of num-one%, in line with our negative mid single-digit comp guidance.
in addition, the qtr-four sales will see a benefit of approximately num-one basis points from net new and relocated stores.
we now expect year-six capital expenditures to be between $num-one million and $num-two million, including around num-three store openings, of which around num-four will be relocations.
in the coming year, we expect to unveil further capabilities and additional buy now pay later choices.
while sales volumes will range depending on square footage and market demographics, we expect at least $num-one million of annualized impact from next year's net new stores and that they will deliver num-txtall ebitda margins of num-two% or greater.
for the full year, we expect gross margin rate to be down approximately num-one basis points versus year-four and approximately num-two basis points versus year-five.
in addition, we have taken pricing actions and we'll continue to do so in response to volatile supply chain costs, while continuing to deliver great value for our customers.
the guidance does not incorporate any share repurchases we may may complete in the quarter.