we ended the first quarter year-seven with $num-one billion in liquidity versus $num-two million at the end of the fourth quarter.
revenue per passenger day for the first quarter year-seven increased approximately num-one% compared to a strong year-four despite our lucrative world cruises and exotic voyages being shelved this year.
as of today, num-one% of our fleet capacity has resumed guest cruise operations.
since the middle of january, we have seen an improving trend in booking volumes for future sailings.
recent weekly booking volumes have been higher than at any point since the restart of guest cruise operations.
for the first quarter, occupancy was num-one% across the ships in service. despite all that, during the first quarter, we carried over one million guests, which was nearly a num-two% increase from the fourth quarter year-six.
and we now expect each brand's full fleet to be back in guest cruise operations for its respective summer season where we historically generate the largest share of our operating income.
given all these factors combined, we expect monthly adjusted ebitda to continue to improve and turn consistently positive at the beginning of our summer season.
we continue to expect that occupancy will build throughout year-seven and return to historical levels in year-eight.
our cumulative advanced book position for the first half of year-eight continues to be at the higher end of the historical range, also at higher prices with or without fccs normalized for bundled packages as compared to year-four sailings.
we anticipate that many of these costs and expenses driving adjusted cruise costs without fuel per albd higher will end during year-seven and will not reoccur in year-eight.
as a result of all of the above, we expect to see a significant improvement in adjusted cruise costs, excluding fuel per albd, from the first half of year-seven to the second half of year-seven with a low double-digit increase expected for the full year year-seven compared to year-four.
we continue to expect a net loss for the second quarter of year-seven on both a u.s. gaap and adjusted basis.
however, we expect the profit for the third quarter of year-seven.