next, i'll provide a summary of our fourth quarter cash flows.
next, i'll provide a summary of our fourth quarter cash flows.
now of course, as we mentioned before, we've also achieved a structural benefit to unit costs as we deliver these new, larger, more efficient ships, coupled with the exit of num-one less efficient ships, it will help generate a num-two% reduction in ship level unit cost going forward, enabling us to deliver more revenue to the bottom line.
and as we said we would, we maintain price despite the disruption, achieving num-one% higher revenue per passenger cruise day in our fourth quarter than in the fourth quarter of year-four.
for the fourth quarter, occupancy was num-one% across the ships in service and that was a num-two point improvement over the num-three% we achieved last quarter during the peak summer season despite the slowdown in bookings just prior to the fourth quarter from the delta variant.
revenue per passenger cruise day for the fourth quarter year-six increased num-one% compared to a strong year-four despite the current constraints on itinerary offering.
simply, our monthly average cash burn rate of $num-one million per month times num-two.
over the next few months, we expect ship level cash contributions to grow as more ships return to service and as we build on our occupancy percentage.
our cumulative advance book position for the second half of year-seven and the first half of year-eight are at the higher end of historical ranges and at higher prices compared to year-four, with or without fcc's, but normalized for bundled packages.
booking volumes for the same period during the fourth quarter of year-six were higher than the third quarter.
while we expect the net loss for the first half of year-seven, it makes me feel so good to say we expect the profit for the second half of year-seven.
i am so happy to report that our cash from operations turned positive in the month of november, ahead of our previous indication, driven by increases in customer deposits and other working capital changes.
given all these factors combined, we expect both monthly cash from operations and monthly ebitda to consistently turn positive during the second quarter of fiscal year-seven.
for the fourth quarter, occupancy was num-one% across the ships in service and that was a num-two point improvement over the num-three% we achieved last quarter during the peak summer season despite the slowdown in bookings just prior to the fourth quarter from the delta variant.
however, we will pursue refinancings to extend maturities and reduce interest expense at the right time.