given this increased collateral base, we were able to take advantage of these asset levels and upsized our abl facility last quarter, increasing our available liquidity by $num-one billion to our current level of $num-two billion.
on another very important note on the balance sheet, our net pension and opeb liabilities saw a $num-one billion reduction during qtr-four, primarily due to actuarial gains and strong asset performance, leading to a $num-two billion or nearly num-three% net reduction during year-six.
with our capex needs in year-seven relatively low and strong confidence in our cash flows, we are very comfortable putting in place the $num-one billion share buyback program just announced.
in addition, iron ore pellets are scope num-one emission for cleveland-cliffs, but they are scope num-two emissions for the clients we sell them to.
unfortunately, the scope num-one emissions are not accounted for, not counted in anyone's reduction targets and surprisingly, at least for now, no one really seems to care about scope num-one emissions, therefore, producing fewer tons of pellets automatically reduce our scope num-two emissions.
of all ctxt-num emissions generated in the united states, the emissions related to the production of steel represent just num-one% of the total.
one more time, just num-one%.
but here in the united states, it is just num-one%.
this is where the importance of steel made in u.s.a. is most significant as our very small emissions footprint, again, just num-one%.
our revenues of $num-one billion, net income of $num-two billion, adjusted ebitda of $num-three billion, and free cash flow of $num-four billion were all-time annual records in our company's history.
given this increased collateral base, we were able to take advantage of these asset levels and upsized our abl facility last quarter, increasing our available liquidity by $num-one billion to our current level of $num-two billion.
looking ahead, even under today's pessimistic hrc futures curve, we would expect higher overall average selling prices in year-seven than we saw in year-six when hrc averaged $num-one per ton.