on the bottom line, adjusted earnings per share was $num-one, down num-two% compared to $num-three in year-four.
reported operating income was $num-one million, a decrease of num-two% and reported earnings per share for the fourth quarter was $num-three, down num-four% compared to $num-five a year ago.
our store conversion rate grew num-one% in the quarter.
the largest growth in our sales before the pandemic, both in percentage and absolute dollars, was driven by our product offerings focused on num-one -- num-two to num-txtear-old children.
on page num-one, we've summarized some highlights of the fourth quarter.
adjusted sg&a increased num-one% to $num-two million.
we're expecting all of our business segments will deliver growth in net sales with our consolidated net sales growing about num-one%.
ecommerce comparable sales were strong, up num-one% in the u.s. and up num-two% in canada.
on page num-one we continued to innovate in our marketing in the fourth quarter and lean into emotionally driven digital experiences for families such as our virtual visits with santa and virtual pj parties with leslie odom jr., the star of hamilton.
our border and tourist stores represent num-one% of our u.s. stores that contributed over num-two% of the decline in comparable sales.
our store closure plan is expected to be accretive to earnings in year-six and provide a $num-one million cumulative earnings benefit by year-ten.
our suppliers were running on average num-one days late due to covid-related challenges and precautions and transportation delays.
the largest growth in our sales before the pandemic, both in percentage and absolute dollars, was driven by our product offerings focused on num-one -- num-two to num-txtear-old children.
net sales in the quarter were $num-one million, down num-two% from the prior year.
turning to page num-one for a summary of net sales for the fourth quarter; reported net sales declined num-two% to $num-three million.
the effectiveness of our initiatives is most evident and looking at the difference in our performance between the first and second halves of the year, which we've summarized on page num-one.
adjusted earnings per share is expected to grow about num-one%, a bit less than what we are planning for operating income growth because of the higher interest costs from the senior notes we issued last year and an assumption of a higher tax rate with more of our income expected to be generated in the united states this year versus overseas.
we do expect first quarter profitability will increase significantly with operating income in the neighborhood of $num-one million and adjusted earnings per share of approximately $num-two compared to losses a year ago.