regarding earnings on the quarter, qtr-three reported earnings reflect a loss of $num-one per share. excluding fees associated with our long-term debt restructuring and the transition of our european markets to a partnership model, adjusted earnings per share for the quarter were $num-two.
online sales grew num-one% in the quarter compared to year-four, representing num-two% of total sales, and our migration to the cloud has unlocked innovation in our tech portfolio.
our strong e-commerce channel continues to be an advantage as online sales were up num-one% compared to year-four, contributing num-two% of sales in the quarter, up from num-three% of total sales in qtr-three year-four.
we remain cautious in our outlook for the balance of the year and are updating year-six earnings per share guidance range to $num-one to $num-two per share on a reported basis, and $num-three to $num-four per share on an adjusted basis.
full-year year-six reported earnings per share are now expected to be in the range of $num-one to $num-two, which includes net charges of num-three million, comprised of num-four million in fees related to the restructuring of our long-term debt, and approximately num-five million related to divestitures and the transition of our european business model to a part -- european business to a partnership model.
we remain cautious in our outlook for the balance of the year and are updating year-six earnings per share guidance range to $num-one to $num-two per share on a reported basis, and $num-three to $num-four per share on an adjusted basis.
excluding these charges and associated tax impacts, full-year year-six adjusted earnings per share is expected to be in the range of $num-one to $num-two.
excluding the impact from fees related to debt extinguishment and the charge changes to our european operating model, the adjusted effective tax rate was num-one%.
first, we expect year-six full-year revenue growth of about num-one% versus year-five.
despite the supply chain disruption, comp sales were up num-one% on a two-year basis, with three of our four brands delivering positive two-year comps.
comp sales improved num-one% on a two-year basis.
with the added air cost and the meaningful sales impact from supply constraints, we now expect full-year year-six reported operating margin to be about num-one%, with adjusted operating margin at about num-two% for fiscal year-six.
while we had planned into the known supply chain constraints as we entered the quarter, including covid-related closures in vietnam, the shock to our business persisted longer than anticipated as weeks turned into months.
so despite strong sell-through trends, we lost volume as a result of limited supply.
while we aspire to improve our on-time deliveries for holiday by adding air capacity and utilizing alternate ports, the supply chain situation continues to be volatile.
banana republic reported a net sales decline of num-one% versus year-four, and a negative num-two% two-year comp. our online sales grew num-three% in the quarter compared to year-four, and we maintained our rank as no.