and adjusted and gaap earnings per share increased num-one% and num-two% over prior year to $num-three and $num-four, respectively.
and adjusted and gaap earnings per share increased num-one% and num-two% over prior year to $num-three and $num-four, respectively.
and adjusted and gaap earnings per share increased num-one% and num-two% over prior year to $num-three and $num-four, respectively.
sales for the quarter were $num-one billion, which includes $num-two million of ppe revenue.
first, our apparel business outperformed; second, the organization quickly pivoted to create a new ppe business; third, we generated positive cash flow; and fourth, we ended the quarter with $num-one billion of liquidity.
we ended the quarter with $num-one billion of liquidity, which we believe provides us ample capital to maximize our operating flexibility and positions us to grow the business going forward.
and we ended the quarter with approximately $num-one billion of liquidity, which we believe provides us with significant cash capital cushion in this uncertain environment.
restructuring and other related charges were approximately $num-one million in the quarter.
due to the uncertainty and unpredictability of the covid pandemic as well as the current lack of visibility in our business environment, we are not providing third quarter or full year year-five guidance at this time.
adjusting for sales from our ppe business, core u.s. innerwear performed significantly better than our base case scenario.
combined with a lower overall unit and sales volume, we believe it is reasonable to assume year-over-year pressure on margins in both this third and fourth quarters.
we expect to generate more than $num-one million of additional ppe revenue in the second half of the year.
with respect to our ppe business, we currently expect more than a $num-one million of ppe revenue in the second half, the vast majority of which is expected in the third quarter.
and in terms of cash flow, we continue to expect to generate positive cash flow in the second half of the year.
and we ended the quarter with approximately $num-one billion of liquidity, which we believe provides us with significant cash capital cushion in this uncertain environment.