today we reported adjusted earnings per share of $num-one for the third quarter and updated full year year-six adjusted earnings per share guidance to approximately $num-two to reflect a net unmitigated covid headwind resulting from our current view of utilization levels for the balance of the year.
today, we reported adjusted earnings per share of $num-one for the third quarter of year-six, slightly above consensus estimates.
today we reported adjusted earnings per share of $num-one for the third quarter and updated full year year-six adjusted earnings per share guidance to approximately $num-two to reflect a net unmitigated covid headwind resulting from our current view of utilization levels for the balance of the year.
this update reflects a more conservative posture going into the final months of the year and notably $num-one remains the baseline of which to grow for year-seven.
and notably $num-one remains the baseline of which to grow for year-seven.
taken together, our updated full year year-six adjusted earnings per share guidance takes a more conservative posture going into the final months of year-six, and it's important to note as we've consistently shared throughout the year the midpoint of our original guidance range of $num-one remains the correct baseline for year-seven given our approach to pricing.
as previously mentioned, i want to reiterate that the $num-one midpoint of our original year-six guide continues to be the appropriate jumping-off point for year-seven adjusted earnings per share growth given our approach to pricing.
we have refined our full year individual medicare advantage membership guidance to up approximately num-one members consistent with the midpoint of our previous guidance of up num-two to num-three members.
in september year-six as a result of the surge in covid cases due to the delta variant, we updated our commentary on full year guidance to indicate we expected non-covid medicare advantage utilization to be num-one% below baseline in the back half of the year, while being partially offset by num-two% of covid costs, therefore, again assuming total utilization would be num-three% below baseline in the back half of year-six.
given the ongoing uncertainty surrounding the covid pandemic we expect to enter the year with an appropriately conservative view of our initial year-seven financial outlook.
as susan will share in more detail, this reduction of approximately $num-one in adjusted earnings per share is a direct result of covid and corresponds to our current expectation of the total medicare advantage utilization inclusive of covid costs will run num-one% below baseline in the fourth quarter, which is a num-two basis points less than our previous assumption of num-three% below baseline.
what we've seen develop for the third quarter is that total utilization is running num-one% below baseline versus the previously anticipated num-two%.
as covid hospitalizations increased or decreased we continue to see an approximate num-txto-num-one offset in non-covid hospitalization levels.
however, for the third quarter, in total we saw num-one% incremental reduction in utilization beyond the level needed to offset covid costs versus the num-two% contemplated in our previous guide.
as a result, we have adjusted our full year guide to now reflect the fourth quarter running similarly with total medicare advantage utilization running num-one% below baseline inclusive of estimated covid costs, consistent with what we experienced in the third quarter.