fourth quarter comparable earnings per share of $num-one was a decline of num-two% year over year, resulting in full year comparable earnings per share of $num-three, an increase of num-four% versus the prior year, as the strong resurgence in the business also benefited from a num-txtoint tailwind from currency and tax.
our qtr-four organic revenue growth was num-one%.
our qtr-four organic revenue growth was num-one%. we expect organic revenue growth of approximately num-two% to num-three%, and we expect comparable currency-neutral earnings-per-share growth of num-three% to num-four% versus year-six.
we expect organic revenue growth of approximately num-one% to num-two%, and we expect comparable currency-neutral earnings-per-share growth of num-two% to num-three% versus year-six.
based on current rates and hedge positions, we continue to expect commodity price inflation to have a mid-single-digit impact on comparable cost of goods sold in year-seven.
based on current rates and our hedge positions, we anticipate an approximate num-txtoint currency headwind to comparable revenue and an approximate num-one to num-two points currency headwind to comparable earnings per share for full year year-seven. additionally, due to a certain change in recent regulations, we estimate an effective tax rate increase from num-three% in year-six to num-four% for year-seven, which is an estimated num-five percentage points headwind to eps.
based on current rates and our hedge positions, we anticipate an approximate num-txtoint currency headwind to comparable revenue and an approximate num-one to num-two points currency headwind to comparable earnings per share for full year year-seven.
fourth quarter comparable earnings per share of $num-one was a decline of num-two% year over year, resulting in full year comparable earnings per share of $num-three, an increase of num-four% versus the prior year, as the strong resurgence in the business also benefited from a num-txtoint tailwind from currency and tax.
therefore, all in, we expect comparable earnings-per-share growth of num-one% to num-two% versus year-six, including the combined num-one- to num-txtoint headwind from currency and tax.
based on current rates and our hedge positions, we anticipate an approximate num-txtoint currency headwind to comparable revenue and an approximate num-one to num-two points currency headwind to comparable earnings per share for full year year-seven.
we expect organic revenue growth of approximately num-one% to num-two%, and we expect comparable currency-neutral earnings-per-share growth of num-two% to num-three% versus year-six. therefore, all in, we expect comparable earnings-per-share growth of num-four% to num-five% versus year-six, including the combined num-four- to num-txtoint headwind from currency and tax.