since the launch last august, over num-one million users has addressed our bitmoji and ralph lauren and tried on the collection over num-two million times.
our digital business outperformed with sales up more than num-one% to last year, including double-digit growth in all regions and even more importantly, our digital operating margins continued to expand, with qtr-three digital margins up num-two basis points to last year and accretive to our total company rates to a combination of higher quality of sales and operating expense leverage.
this stage focuses on realigning our real-estate footprint to our future strategic priorities.
global wholesale revenue declined num-one% and direct to consumer revenues were down num-two%.
third quarter aur growth of num-one% was above our expectations with north america and europe up double-digits and asia up high-single digits.
today, we announced the next stage of our plan, which is focused on realigning and driving increased efficiencies across our global real estate footprint.
third quarter revenue declined num-one% on a reported basis and num-two% in constant currency.
second closing up to num-one retail locations globally.
our digital commerce comps were up num-one% with total digital sales up num-two% in the quarter.
moving on to segment performance, starting with north america.
combined, these actions are expected to result in growth annualized pre-tax expense savings of approximately $num-one million to $num-two million.
we reduced our site wide promotions by num-one days compared to the prior year as we continue to elevate our digital experience driving aurs up num-two% and gross margins up more than num-three basis points to last year in the channel.
in north america wholesale, third quarter revenue declined num-one% as we continue to manage our shipments carefully and realigned inventories to demand.
europe wholesale revenues declined num-one% in constant currency as we continue to limit shipments to reset our inventories to demand.
while we have managed our balance sheet carefully, since the start of the pandemic to preserve liquidity, `we are monitoring covid conditions closely and based on our current outlook, we are planning to reinstate our dividend in the first half of fiscal ' num-one net inventory declined num-two% to last year, including a num-three% decline in north america, num-four% decline in europe and a num-five% increase in asia, to support growth.
as we anticipated at the start of the holiday season, the global retail environment remain volatile, due to the pandemic and other macro factors.
we currently expect fourth quarter revenues to decline approximately mid-to-high single-digits, representing a meaningful sequential improvement from the first three quarters of the year.