specifically, during our third quarter, we generated comparable basis eps, excluding canopy growth of $num-one, an increase of num-two% versus prior year, delivered strong operating margin and accelerating double-digit depletion growth for our beer business and increased operating cash flow and free cash flow by num-three% and num-four% respectively, resulting in ongoing debt repayment and achievement of target net leverage, excluding canopy equity earnings as we ended the quarter at num-five times.
num-one, which will offer consumers the same great corona taste and refreshment attributes while expanding to new flavors, including pineapple, strawberry, raspberry and passion fruit.
num-one will be followed shortly thereafter by the introduction of another exciting new hard seltzer initiative.
in the near-term, we expect the remaining portfolio post the gallo deal to generate fiscal year-six net sales growth in the num-one% to num-two% range.
in addition, we expect the retained portfolio post divestitures to grow net sales in the num-one% to num-two% range this year.
we are also pleased that the board of directors recently authorized an additional $num-one billion for share repurchases.
due to the continued resiliency of our business and further clarity of the operating environment, we have issued fiscal year-six earnings per share guidance and are projecting our comparable basis diluted earnings per share to range between $num-one and $num-two.
due to the continued resiliency of our business and further clarity of the operating environment, we have issued fiscal year-six earnings per share guidance and are projecting our comparable basis diluted earnings per share to range between $num-one and $num-two.
and while some depletion growth we saw this quarter included benefits from inventory restocking, the portfolio delivered accelerating underlying trends that align with our sales growth projection of num-one% to num-two% for the foreseeable future, as consumer demand remains exceptionally strong for our products across the majority of the portfolio.
overall, our excellent year-to-date results provide confidence in our ability to achieve num-one% to num-two% net sales growth for fiscal year-six.
we expect net sales growth of num-one% to num-two%, which includes one to two points of pricing within our mexican product portfolio.
excluding the impact to ballast point, we expect organic net sales to land in the higher end of the num-one% to num-two% range.
furthermore, we expect fiscal year-six free cash flow to be in the range of $num-one billion to $num-two billion and operating cash flow to be in the range of $num-three billion to $num-four billion. we are projecting full-year fiscal year-six capex spend to be in the range of $num-five million to $num-six million, which includes $num-seven million to $num-eight million of beer capex as we expect an acceleration of spend during qtr-four, driven by the num-nine million hectoliter expansion at obregon.
we now expect fiscal year-six wine and spirits net sales and operating income to decline num-one% to num-two% and num-three% to num-four% respectively, which reflects the closing of the gallo transaction, including nobilo and the concentrate transaction, as well as the paul masson divestiture.
even though margins for the segment took a step back during qtr-three, the underlying fundamentals of our consumer-led premiumization strategy continue to shine through as significant mix and price were generated during the quarter.