excluding restructuring charges, income related to our first year of the myfitnesspal divestiture earnout and the noncash amortization of debt discount on our senior convertible notes, our adjusted net income was $num-one million or $num-two of adjusted diluted earnings per share.
after tax, we realized a net income of $num-one million or $num-two of diluted earnings per share during the quarter.
versus year-four, revenue is up num-one%. compared to the prior year, revenue was up num-two% to $num-three billion.
from a balance sheet perspective, inventory was down num-one% to $num-two million, driven by continued improvements in our operating model and inbound shipping delays due to covid-related supply chain pressures.
related to gross margin, our fourth quarter improved num-one basis points to num-two%.
we expect our transition quarter rate to be down approximately num-one basis points against our qtr-one year-six adjusted gross margin, which includes approximately num-two basis points of negative impact from higher freight expenses related to ongoing covid supply chain challenges in addition to an unfavorable sales mix, partially offset by pricing benefits.
so we now expect to recognize total planned charges ranging from $num-one million to $num-two million.
we expect to recognize any remaining charges related to this plan by the end of the first quarter of our fiscal year year-eight.
from a revenue perspective, we now expect our transition period to be up at a mid-single-digit rate compared to the previous expectation of a low single-digit rate increase.
thus far, we've realized $num-one million of pre-tax restructuring and related charges. related to our year-five restructuring plan, we recorded $num-two million of charges in the fourth quarter.
with that, we expect operating income to reach approximately $num-one million to $num-two million and diluted earnings per share to be approximately $num-three to $num-four.
we expect to recognize any remaining charges related to this plan by the end of the first quarter of our fiscal year year-eight.
at this time, we do expect these uncertainties to cause material impacts and variability in our future results.